SAUNDERS
An Imprint ofElsevier
The Curtis Center
Independence Square West
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19106

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Muller, George H.
[Small animal dermatology]
Muller & Kirk's small animal dermatology.-6th ed./Danny W. Scott, William H.
Miller, Jr., Craig E. Griffin.

p.cm.
ISBN-13:

978-0-7216-7618-0

ISBN-10: 0-7216-7618-9

1. Dogs-Diseases. 2. Cats-Diseases. 3. Pets-Diseases.
4. Veterinary dermatology. I. Kirk, Robert Warren, 1992-. II. Scott, Danny
W. III. Miller, William H. (William Howard), 1948IV. Griffin, Craig E. V. Title
SF992.S55 M85 2001

636.089'65-<lc21
00-030093

ISBN-I3: 978-{}-7216-7618-0
ISBN-IO: 0-7216-7618-9
Acquisitions Editor: Ray Kersey
Book Designer: Jonel Sofian
Production Manager: Norman Stellander
Manuscript Editor: Carol DiBerardino
Illustration Specialist: Lisa Lambert

MULLER & KIRK'S SMALL ANIMAL DERMATOLOGY
Copyright

e 2001, 1995, 1989, 1983, 1976, 1969 by Saunders

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any in formation storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia, USA:
phone: (+ I) 215 239 3804, fax: (+ I) 2152393805, e-mail: healthpermissions@e1sevier.com. You may also
complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com). by selecting 'Support and
contact' and then 'Copyright and Permission',
Printed in China.
Last digit is the print number:

9

8

7

6

5

Preface and
Acknowledgments

Each time we gear up to do another edition of Small Animal Dermatology, we optimistically- yet with the trepidation born of familiarity - tell ourselves that this rewrite will be
less involved, less time consuming, less intimidating than the last. After all . . . we just
did a total rewrite for the previous edition . . . so this one couldn't possibly be as
extensive . . . could it?
Well, once again we have found the task daunting . . . just shy of stifling. In fact, for
the first time in the history of the book, we came in 6 months late. Oof! One convenient
explanation for our struggles and tardiness-one that admittedly attempts to deflect some
portion of the blame from where it clearly should land, right smack-dab on our fidgeting
selves-is the staggering amount of new information that has surfaced in the last 5 years
in the field of veterinary dermatology. Good examples of this prodigious proliferation
include the more than 70 "new" conditions described herein, and the numerous veterinary
dermatology textbooks published during this time span (see Chap. 22).
In veterinary medicine, very little information is available concerning the demographics of canine and feline skin disorders. It has been estimated that between 20% and 75%
of the small animals seen in the average practice have skin problems as a chief or
concurrent owner complaint.t" A 1978 Ralston Purina Company survey indicated that
25% of all small animal practice activity was involved with the diagnosis and treatment of
problems with the skin and haircoat." A nationwide survey by the Alpo Company in 1985
of 2540 small animal practitioners in the United States revealed that skin disorders were
the most common reason for patient visits to the veterinarian's office." Dermatologic
disorders accounted for 18.8% of the dogs and 15.2% of the cats examined at a university
teaching hospital."
Using data gathered from 17 North American veterinary teaching hospitals for the
year 1983, Sischo and associates reported that the 10 most commonly diagnosed canine
skin disorders were, in decreasing order of frequency, flea bite hypersensitivity, skin
cancer, bacterial pyoderma, seborrhea, allergy, demodicosis, scabies, immune-mediated
dermatoses, endocrine dermatoses, and acral lick dermatitis." Significant differences were
noted in the frequency of those skin diseases in the various geographic regions studied. A
survey conducted in 1981 by the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology revealed
the most common feline dermatologic disorders to be, in decreasing order of frequency,
parasitic dermatoses, miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma complex, endocrinologic
disorders, fungal diseases, hypersensitivity reactions, bacterial diseases, psychogenic dermatoses, seborrheic conditions, neoplastic tumors, and autoimmune dermatoses.'?
During a l-year period at a university teaching hospital," the most common dermatoses in dogs and cats were as follows:
Dogs-bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis (25.3% of the cases), atopy (12.7%), food
hypersensitivity (4.7%), flea bite hypersensitivity (3.4%), hyperadrenocorticism
(3.4%), and hypothyroidism (2.7%).
Cats-abscesses (18.5%), otodectic mange (12.9%), cheyletiellosis (8.1%), flea bite
hypersensitivity (6.5%), atopy (5.6%), flea infestation (4.9%), neoplasia (4.9%),
and food hypersensitivity (4%).
v

vi • Preface and Acknowledgments

Clearly, dermatology is a "big ticket item" in small animal practice; bacterial infections, ectoparasitisms, allergies, fungal infections, and neoplasia are common problems.
We cannot overstate our appreciation for those who have contributed to this sixth
edition of Small Animal Dermatology. We couldn't have done it without you! Held up for
special praise and recognition are those who have given so much in terms of love,
patience, and support during this production: Kris, Travis, and Tracy (DWS); Kathy,
Steven, Julia, and Andrew (WHM); and Laura, Trevor, Kyle, and Taylor (CEG). And last,
but not least, we sincerely thank the whole crew at W.B. Saunders Company-especially
Ray Kersey-for their patience, support, and terrific effort.
And now . . . it's time to open up our labor of love for your scrutiny. In the words
of Bob Seger (and the Silver Bullet Band, of course), we invite you to "Tum the Page."

• REFERENCES
1. Schwartzman

RM. Orkin M: A Comparative
Study of Skin Diseases of Dog and Man. Charles
C Thomas, Springfield, CT, 1962.
2. Ihrke PJ, Franti CE: Breed as a risk factor associated with skin diseases in dogs seen in northern
California. Calif Vet 39:13, 1985.
3. Nesbitt GH: Canine and Feline Dermatology: A
Systematic Approach. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1983.
4. Wilkinson GT: Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, 1985.
5. Grant 01: Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat.
Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1986.
6. Ralston Purina Company. An Introduction to the
Nutrition of Dogs and Cats. Veterinary Learning
Systems, Trenton, NJ, 1989.

7. Alpo Veterinary Panel. Dermatological problems
head problem list. DVM Magazine, August,
1985.
8. Scott OW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and
feline skin disorders seen in a university practice:
Small Animal Clinic, University of Montreal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec (1987-1988). Can Vet J
31:830, 1990.
9. Sischo WM, et al: Regional distribution of 10
common skin diseases in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 195:752, 1989.
10. Nesbitt GH: Incidence of feline skin disease: a
survey. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol, Las Vegas,
1982.

D. W. Scott
W. H. Miller, Jr.
e. E. Griffin

The Last Time
The greatest professional honor I have ever received was being asked to join "the book."
Yo! George Muller . . . the legendary father of "the book" . . . and Bob Kirk . . . the
most famous veterinarian on the planet. I mean . . . I had contributed bits and pieces to
the second edition . . . but now I was coauthor of "the bible."
I have always taken "the book" very seriously: as a clinical dermatologist and educator,
I could do no less. "The book" is an enormous commitment, an awesome responsibility.
When it is to be "reborn," it demands your all: all your knowledge, all your experience, all
your sifting and analysis of our vast literature, all your energy. Getting "the book" ready
for its next viewing is all about enthusiasm, conviction, dedication, perseverance, several
very short or sleepless nights, curtailed family time, a number of "Advil moments" and,
when it is done, a feeling of having given all you had . . . of numbness.
I no longer have what it takes to do "the book" the way it needs to be done . . . and
I love this book too much to do anything less than give it the very best there is. So, this
will be my last edition. It has been a great ride, a true honor and blessing to be associated
with "the book." And Ray Kersey with W.B. Saunders and my wife, Kris, have been with
me for the whole 25 years. As much as it aches to say good-bye . . . it is time. I am
comforted in the knowledge that-in Bill and Craig-Small Animal Dermatology will be
left in knowledgeable, experienced, dedicated, and loving hands.
And now I am reminded of a great old song by Mick and the boys, which I have
often found myself humming as I worked on this sixth edition!

The Last Time
(Mick Jagger and Keith Richard, 1965)
Thanks, George. Thanks, Bob. Thanks, Ray. Thanks, Kris. Thanks, Bill. Thanks, Craig.
Thanks to everyone out there. May "the book" be with you!

Danny
Ithaca, New York- 2000

NOTICE
Companion animal practice is an ever-changing field. Standard safety precautions must be
followed, but as new research and clinical experience grow, changes in treatment and drug
therapy become, necessary or appropriate. The authors and editors of this work have
carefully checked the generic and trade drug names and verified drug dosages to ensure
that dosage information is precise and in accord with standards accepted at the time of
publication. Readers are advised, however, to check the product information currently
provided by the manufacturer of each drug to be administered to be certain that changes
have not been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for administration. This is of particular importance in regard to new or infrequently used drugs.
Recommended dosages for animals are sometimes based on adjustments in the dosage
that would be suitable for humans. Some of the drugs mentioned here have been given
experimentally by the authors. Others have been used in dosages greater than those
recommended by the manufacturer. In these kinds of cases, the authors have reported on
their own considerable experience. It is the responsibility of those administering a drug,
relying on their professional skill and experience, to determine the dosages, the best
treatment for the patient, and whether the benefits of giving a drug justify the attendant
risk The editors cannot be responsible for misuse or misapplication of the material in this
work
THE PUBLISHER

ix

Chapter

1
Structure and Function of the
Skin

W

hat a glorious organ it is! The skin is the largest and most visible organ of the
body and the anatomic and physiologic barrier between animal and environment.
It provides protection from physical, chemical, and microbiologic injury, and its sensory
components perceive heat, cold, pain, pruritus, touch, and pressure. In addition, the skin
is synergistic with internal organ systems and thus reflects pathologic processes that are
either primary elsewhere or shared with other tissues. Not only is the skin an organ with
its own reaction patterns; it is also a mirror reflecting the milieu interieur and, at the same
time, the capricious world to which it is exposed. The skin, hair, and subcutis of a
newborn puppy represent 24% of its body weight. 180
By the time of maturity, these structures constitute only 12% of body weight.

• GENERAL FUNCTIONS AND PROPERTIES OF THE SKIN
The general functions and properties of animal skin are as follows":
1. Enclosing barrier. The most important function of skin is to make possible an

internal environment for all other organs by maintaining an effective barrier to
the loss of water, electrolytes, and macromolecules.
2. Environmental 'Protection. A corollary function is the exclusion of external injurious agents-chemical, physical, and microbiologic-from entrance into the internal environment.
3. Motion and shape. The flexibility, elasticity, and toughness of the skin allow
motion and provide shape and form.
4. Adnexa production. Skin produces keratinized structures such as hair, claws, and
the horny layer of the epidermis.
5. Temperature regulation. Skin plays a role in the regulation of body temperature
through its support of the hair coat, regulation of cutaneous blood supply, and
sweat gland function.
6. Storage. The skin is a reservoir of electrolytes, water, vitamins, fat, carbohydrates,
proteins, and other materials.
7. Indicator. The skin may be an important indicator of general health, internal
disease, and the effects of substances applied topically or taken internally. It
contributes to physical and sexual identity.
8. Immunoregulation. Keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, and lymphocytes together
provide the skin with an immunosurveillance capability that effectively protects
against the development of cutaneous neoplasms and persistent infections.
9. Pigmentation. Processes in the skin (melanin formation, vascularity, and keratinization) help determine the color of the coat and skin. Pigmentation of the skin
helps prevent damage from solar radiation.
10. Antimicrobial action. The skin surface has antibacterial and antifungal properties.

"See references 57, 65, 102, 150, 166, 172, 180, 187, and 196.

2 • Structure and Function of the Skin

11. Sensory perception. Skin is a primary sense organ for touch, pressure, pain, itch,
heat, and cold.
12. Secretion. Skin is a secretory organ by virtue of its epitrichial (apocrine), atrichial
(eccrine), and sebaceous glands.
13. Excretion. The skin functions in a limited way as an excretory organ.
14. Vitamin D production. Vitamin D is produced in the skin through stimulation by
solar radiation. In the epidermis, vitamin D 3 (cholecalciferol) is formed from
provitamin D 3 (7-dehydrocholesterol), via previtamin D 3 , on exposure to sunlight. 55 The vitamin D-binding protein in plasma translocates vitamin D,} from
the skin to the circulation. Vitamin D 3 is then hydroxylated in the liver to 25hydroxyvitamin D 3 and again hydroxylated in the kidney to form 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 , which is important in the regulation of epidermal proliferation and
differentiation.s-?"

• ONTOGENY
Skin is a complex multicellular organ in which endoderm, neural crest, and ectoderm
contribute to form a three-dimensional unit in a spatially and temporally defined manner.
Skin morphogenesis involves the action of multiple genes in a coordinated fashion. Homeobox genes are a gene family that encode information critical for normal embryologic
development and that likely play a very important role in the development of skin adnexa,
pigment system, and stratified epithelium during embryogenesis.l'"
Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions regulate tissue homeostasis, the balanced regulation of proliferation and differentiation maintaining normal tissue architecture and function.'!" Multiple circuits of reciprocal permissive and instructive effects exist between
epithelial and mesenchymal cells and extracellular matrices.
Initially, the embryonic skin consists of a Single layer of ectodermal cells and a
dermis containing loosely arranged mesenchymal cells embedded in an interstitial
ground substance. The ectodermal covering progressively develops into two layers
(the basal cell layer, or stratum germinativum, and the outer periderm), three layers (the
stratum intermedium forms between the other two layers), and then into an adult-like
structure.P" 65. 166, 180 Melanocytes (neural crest origin) and Langerhans' cells (bone marrow
origin) become identifiable during this period of ectodermal maturation.
Dermal development is characterized by an increase in the thickness and number of
fibers, a decrease in ground substance, and the transition of mesenchymal cells to fibroblasts. This process of building a fiber-rich matrix has been referred to as a ripening of
the dermis. Elastin fibers appear later than do collagen fibers. Histiocytes, Schwarm cells,
and dermal melanocytes also become recognizable. Fetal skin contains a large percentage
of Type III collagen compared with the skin of an adult, which contains a large proportion of Type I collagen." Lipocytes (adipocytes, fat cells) begin to develop into the
subcutis from spindle-shaped mesenchymal precursor cells (prelipoblasts) in the second
half of gestation.
The embryonal stratum germinativum differentiates into hair germs (primary epithelial
germs), which give rise to hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and epitrichial (apocrine) sweat
glands. 4 , 10, 177 Hair germs initially consist of an area of crowding of deeply basophilic cells
in the basal layer of the epidermis. Subsequently, the areas of crowding become buds that
protrude into the dermis. Beneath each bud lies a group of mesenchymal cells, from
which the dermal hair papilla is later formed.
As the hair peg lengthens and develops into a hair follicle and hair, three bulges
appear. The lowest (deepest) of the bulges develops into the attachment for the arrector
pili muscle; the middle bulge differentiates into the sebaceous gland; and the uppermost
bulge evolves into the epitrichial sweat gland. These appendages develop on the ental side
of primary hair follicles; secondary hair follicles develop on the extal side. In general, the
first hairs to appear on the fetus are vibrissae and tactile or sinus hairs that develop on
the chin, eyebrows, and upper lip as white, slightly raised dots on otherwise smooth, bare

Structure and Function of the Skin • 3
skin.166, 177 The general body hair appears first on the head and gradually progresses
caudally.
Atrichial (eccrine) sweat gland germs also begin as areas of crowding of deeply
basophilic cells in the basal layer of the epidermis. They initially differ from hair germs
only slightly by being narrower and by showing fewer mesenchymal cells at their base.
Cell interaction plays a central role in the formation of skin appendages.'!" Morphogens are substances that control the development of the hair follicle." ,50 In addition,
several new adhesion molecule families that mediate cell-to-cell and cell-to-substrate adhesion have been identified: (1) neural cell adhesion molecules (N-CAM), which belong to
the immunoglobulin (IgG) gene superfamily; (2) cadherins, which mediate adhesion in the
presence of calcium; (3) tenascin, which is a unique matrix molecule similar to the
epidermal cell growth factor (EGF); (4) fibronectin, fibrinogen, and syndecan; and (.5)
integrins, which serve as cellular receptors for fibronectin, collagen, and other extracellular
matrix molecules.v'- 50, 65, 110 Thus, in each step of the morphogenesis of skin appendages,
different adhesion molecules are expressed and are involved in different functions: induction, mesenchymal condensation, epithelial folding, and cell death.
All vessels in fetal skin develop first as capillaries.v 65 They have been suggested to
organize in situ from dermal mesenchymal cells into Single-layered endothelial tubes.
Branches from large subcutaneous nerve trunks extend into the dermis and organize into
deep and superficial plexuses related to the vascular plexus .

• GROSS ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
At each body orifice, the skin is continuous with the mucous membrane located there
(digestive, respiratory, ocular, urogenital). The skin and haircoat vary in quantity and
quality among species, among breeds within a species, and among individuals within a
breed; they also vary from one area to another on the body, and in accordance with age
and sex.
In general, skin thickness decreases dorsally to ventrally on the trunk and proximally
to distally on the limbs. 166, 172, 180, 188, 202 The skin is thickest on the forehead, dorsal neck,
dorsal thorax, rump, and base of the tail. It is thinnest on the pinnae and on the axillary,
inguinal, and perianal areas. The reported average thickness of the general body skin of
cats is 0.4 to 2.0 mm 172, 188; of dogs, it is 0.5 to 5.0 mm. 102, 180 The haircoat is usually
thickest over the dorsolateral aspects of the body and thinnest ventrally, on the lateral
surface of the pinnae, and on the undersurface of the tail.
The skin surfaces of haired mammals are, in general, acidic. The pH of normal feline
and canine skin has been reported to range from about 5.5 to 7.5. 49 , 102, 132, 157, 158, 172 In a
dynamic study of skin surface pH in dogs,158 the following observations were made: pH
values varied at different sites on the skin and varied from day to day; males had
Significantly higher pH values than females on all sites; spayed females had Significantly
higher pH values at all sites than intact females; black Labrador retrievers had Significantly
higher pH values than yellow Labrador retrievers, and Labrador retrievers and miniature
schnauzers were significantly different from English springer spaniels and Yorkshire terriers. Clearly, skin surface pH appears to vary with site, day, coat color, sex, gonadal status,
and breed. In addition, it has been reported that the skin surface pH of an excited dog
can increase by greater than 1 unit within 1 minute.l'"
The metabolism of the skin is not well understood. All of the enzymes of the
glycolytic pathway and those of the tricarboxylic acid cycle have been demonstrated in
skin, but actual glucose metabolism seems to be anomalous. 19, 65, 72, 98, 180 Glucose is
preferentially metabolized to lactate, rather than fully oxidized to CO 2, The skin is an
active site of fatty acid metabolism (see Chap. 3).
Studies of the surface markings of the muzzle and nose have shown that there are
individual, genetically determined differences similar to those of human fingertips.166 It
has been suggested that imprints ("fingerprints") of these special skin areas (termed
labiograms or nasolabiograms) could be used for the identification of animals.

4 • Structure and Function of the Skin

Hair
Hair, which is characteristic of mammals, is important in thermal insulation and sensory perception and as a barrier against chemical, physical, and microbial injury to the
skin.55, 119. 177. 187 Hair is photoprotective. The ability of a haircoat to regulate body
temperature correlates closely with its length, thickness, and density per unit area, and
with the medullation of individual hair fibers. In general, haircoats composed of long, fine,
poorly medullated fibers, with the coat depth increased by piloerection, are the most
efficient for thermal insulation at low environmental temperatures. Coat color is also of
some importance in thermal regulation; light-colored coats are more efficient in hot, sunny
weather. The glossiness of the haircoat is important in reflecting sunlight. Transglutaminase is a marker of early anagen hair follicles, and it is important in the protein crosslinking that contributes to the shape and remarkable physical strength of hair. 55 , 112 The
diameter of the hair shaft is largely determined by the volume of the hair matrix epithelium, and the final length of the hair shaft is determined by both the rate of hair growth
and the duration of anagen.
Both primary (outercoat, guard) and secondary (undercoat) hairs are medullated in
dogs and cats; thus, the term lanugo, meaning nonmedulated, is incorrect when applied to
nonfetal dogs and cats. In cats, secondary hairs are far more numerous than primary hairs
(10:1 dorsally, 24:1 ventrallyl.I" The hairs of the cat have been divided into three types
based on gross appearance: (1) guard hairs (thickest, straight, evenly tapered to a fine tip),
(2) awn hairs (thinner, possessing subapical swelling below the hair tip), and (3) down
hairs (thinnest, evenly crimped or undulating).155, 174, 177 In general, the shape of the hair
fiber is determined by the shape of the hair follicle, with straight follicles producing
straight hairs and curly follicles producing curly hairs. Inn, 177
In general, no new hair follicles are formed after birth. Puppies do not actually "lose"
their puppy coat; rather, they gain an adult coat. Puppies have Simple hair follicles that
produce secondary hairs for the first 12 weeks of life.50 All hair follicles grow obliquely (30
to 60 degrees) in relation to the epidermis. The direction of the slope of the hairs, which
varies from one region of the body to another, gives rise to the hair tracts. 177 The study of
hair tract patterns is called trichoglyphics. The true significance and the origin of hair
tracts are unknown. With the hair slope generally running caudally and ventrally, benefits
include minimal impediment to forward motion and the ability of water to flow off the
body to the ground without soaking the haircoat, which would reduce its thermal-insulating properties.
Adult shorthaired cats produced a yearly amount of hair growth of 32.7g1kg. 75 Dogs
produced 60 to 180 glkg, depending on the breed.P?

Hair Cycle
Analysis of the factors controlling or influencing hair growth is complicated by evolutionary history/" The pelage changes as a mammal grows, and that of the adult often differs
markedly from that of the juvenile, reflecting different requirements for heat regulation,
camouflage, and sexual and social communication. In addition, the cyclic activity of the
hair follicles and the periodic molting of hairs have provided a mechanism by which the
pelage can be adapted to seasonal changes in ambient temperature or environmental
background. This mechanism is influenced by changes in the photoperiod, which acts
through the hypothalamus, hypophysis, and pineal gland, altering levels of various hormones (including melatonin, prolactin, and those of gonadal, thyroidal, and adrenocortical
origin) and modifying the inherent rhythms of the hair follicle.
Hair growth cycles involve the repeated induction of hair follicle anlagen and their
concurrent downward growth and invasion through the dermis. 25, 203 Signals controlling
hair follicle induction, development, regression, and reactivation have not been identified;
however, multiple growth factors or their receptors (e.g., EGF, transforming growth factor
[TGF]-131, TGF-132, neurotrophin-3) have been localized to hair follicles and the surrounding mesenchyme. These growth factors control cellular proliferation and collagenase

Structure and Function of the Skin • 5

release from cultured hair follicles. In addition, an interplay between class I major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression, chondroitin proteoglycans, and activated
macrophages is involved in the regulation of hair growth, especially during the catagen
phase. 4 • 62
Neural mechanisms of hair growth control in mice have revealed that the sensory and
autonomic innervation of hair follicles, the substance P content of skin, and the cutaneous
nerve-mast cell contacts show changes during the hair cycle.v" The hair follicle is a
source and a target of neurotrophins, and neuropharmacologic manipulations alter hair
cycling. The trophic effects of cutaneous nerves on follicular growth are exerted via
regulation of vascular tone (nutrient and oxygen supply), neuropeptide stimulation of
receptors on follicular keratinocytes and dermal papilla fibroblasts, and modulation of
macrophage and mast cell activities. In dogs, hair growth retardation (follicular atrophy)
has occurred after experimental sectioning of peripheral nerves and dorsal roots. 100 However, peripheral nerve damage can also induce increased hair growth, as seen in the
unilateral hypertrichosis ("hemitrichosis") following major unilateral thoracic surgery in
dogs. 100
Hairs do not grow continuously but rather in cycles (Fig. 1-1). Each cycle consists of
a growing period (anagen), during which the follicle is actively producing hair, and a
resting period (telogen), during which the hair is retained in the follicle as a dead (or
club) hair that is subsequently lost. There is also a transitional period (catagen) between
these two stages. It is often stated that certain breeds of dogs, such as poodles, Old
English sheepdogs, and schnauzers, have continuously growing hair coats, 180 but there has
been no scientific investigation that would substantiate such a statement. The relative
duration of the phases of the cycle varies with the age of the individual, the region of the
body, the breed, and the sex, and it can be modified by a variety of physiologic and
pathologic factors.
The hair cycle, and thus the haircoat, are controlled by photoperiod, ambient temperature, nutrition, hormones, general state of health, genetics, and poorly understood intrinsic factors. 2 - 4 , 17, 28, 65, 68, 70, 7,5, 119, 166, 167, 177. 180, 196 Intrinsic factors include growth factors
and cytokines produced by the follicle, the dermal papilla, and other cells (lymphocytes,

FIGURE I-I. The hair cycle. a, Anagen: During this growing stage, hair is produced by mitosis in
cells of the dermal papilla, b, Early catagen: In this transitional stage, a constriction occurs at the hair
bulb, The hair above this will become a "club." c, Catagen: The distal follicle becomes thick and
corrugated and pushes the hair outward. d, Telogen: This is the resting stage. The dermal papilla
separates and an epithelial strand shortens to form a secondary germ. e, Early anagen: The secondary
germ grows down to enclose the dermal papilla and a new hair bulh forms. The old "club" is lost. f,
Anagen: The hair elongates as growth continues.

6 • Structure and Function of the Skin

macrophages, fibroblasts, mast cells) in the immediate environment. In cats, there was no
effect of repeated clipping on hair growth. 75
Hair replacement in dogs and cats is mosaic in pattern because neighboring hair
follicles are in different stages of the hair cycle at anyone time. Replacement is unaffected by castration; it responds predominantly to photoperiod and, to a lesser extent, to
ambient temperature. Dogs and cats in temperate latitudes such as the northern United
States and Canada may shed noticeably in the spring and fall. Hair follicle activity, and
thus hair growth rate, are maximal in summer and minimal in winter. For example, up to
50% of hair follicles may be in telogen in the summer, but this proportion may increase
to 90% in the winter. Maximum hair follicle inactivity is reached earlier in female cats
than in male cats." Catagen hairs always constitute a small proportion of the total number
of hairs, usually accounting for 4% to 7% of the total. 3 . 180 Many dogs and cats exposed to
several hours of artificial hght (e.g., animals housed indoors) shed, sometimes profusely,
throughout the year. 172. 180 Sinus hairs are not subject to a seasonal shedding, and are shed
continuously as single hairs.'?'
Hair grows until it attains its preordained length, which varies according to body
region and is genetically determined; it then enters the resting phase, which may last for a
considerable amount of time. Each region of the body has its own ultimate length of hair
beyond which no further growth occurs. This phenomenon is responsible for the distinctive coat lengths of various breeds and is genetically determined. In mongrel dogs, it was
shown that hair growth rates varied at different sites and that the speed of growth was
related to the ultimate length of the hair in each particular site." For example, in the
shoulder region, where ultimate hair length was about 30 mm, the average rate of hair
growth was 6.7 mm/wk, whereas in the forehead region, which had ultimate hair length of
about 16 mm, the growth rate was 2.8 mm/wk. Other investigators have reported daily
hair growth rates in dogs of 0.04 to 0.18 mm (Creyhoundj-" 39 and 0.34 to 0.40 mm
(beagle).2 In the cat, daily hair growth rate has been reported to be 0.25 to 0.30 mm!" or
62 to 289 J-tgjcm2 .75
Because hair is predominantly protein, nutrition has a profound effect on its quantity
and quality (see Chap. 17). Poor nutrition may produce a dull, dry, brittle, or thin haircoat
with or without pigmentary disturbances.
Under conditions of ill health or generahzed disease, anagen may be considerably
shortened; accordingly, a large percentage of body hairs may be in telogen at one time.
Because telogen hairs tend to be more easily lost, the animal may shed excessively.
Disease states may also lead to faulty formation of hair cuticle, which results in a dull,
lusterless hair coat. Severe illness or systemic stress may cause many hair follicles to enter
synchronously and precipitously into telogen. Shedding of these hairs (telogen defluxion;
see Chap. 11) thus occurs simultaneously, often resulting in visible thinning of the coat or
actual alopecia.
The hair cycle and haircoat are also affected by hormonal changes. 28, 65, 70, 119 In
general, anagen is initiated and advanced and hair growth rate is accelerated by thyroid
hormones and growth hormone. Conversely, excessive amounts of glucocorticoids or estrogens inhibit anagen and suppress hair growth rate. Dermal papilla cells, which are a
mesenchymal component of the hair bulb, are considered to play a fundamental role in
the induction of epithelial differentiation. These cells are morphologically and functionally
differentiated from dermal fibroblasts and are thought to be the primary target cells that
respond to hormones and mediate growth-stimulating Signals to the follicular epithelial
cells. 4. 84
Obviously, the details of the regulation of hair follicle cycling and growth are extraordinarily complex and still poorly understood. The factors that control the hair follicle cycle
are, in general, different from the factors that control hair follicle structure. Alterations in
factors (e.g., hormones) controlhng the hair follicle cycle result in follicular atrophy.
Alterations in factors (e.g., morphogens) that control hair follicle structure result in follicular dqsplasia.
Hair growth is a confusing subject that needs much research. It should be remembered that the haircoat of pet animals is a cosmetic or ornamental feature. Every effort

Structure and Function of the Skin • 7

should be made to rmmrrnze procedures (clipping and shaving) that may affect the
animal's appearance for many weeks. Although generalizations can be misleading, normal
or short coats usually take about 3 to 4 months to regrow after shaving and long coats
may take as long as 18 months.l'" Occasionally, an unexplained and extremely frustrating
failure to regrow hair in an area of skin occurs, usually following clipping and surgical
scrubbing.l'" The skin in affected areas appears grossly normal, but biopsy reveals catagenization, or occasionally telogenization, of the hair follicles. This frustrating follicular
arrest disappears spontaneously in 6 months to 2 years after clipping (see Chap. 11).
Attention has been focused on the usefulness of hair analysis as a diagnostic
tool. 184. 216 It is well recognized by most dermatologists and nutritionists in human medicine that mineral and trace element analysis of hair samples is not a clinically useful tool
in the assessment of nutritional status. The reasons for variability and unreliability include
environmental effects (topical agents, geographic location, occupational exposures), differing hair growth rates (health, drugs, age, sex), and lack of standardization in analysis
techniques. Until and unless adequate scientific documentation of the validity of such
multielement analysis is performed, it is necessary for both health professionals and the
public to be aware of the very limited value of hair analysis and of the potential to be
confused and misled by it. Scientifically oriented nutritionists do not use hair analysis as a
primary method of detecting nutritional problems. Cautious consumers and health professionals should regard practitioners who rely solely on this test with suspicion.v"
Small (0.16 to 0.42 mm in diameter), hairless, knoblike structures are present in the
haired skin of cats and dogs. 16g , 172. 180 These tylotrich pads serve as slow-adapting mechanoreceptors.
Cell proliferation kinetic values have been established for the hair follicle epithelium
of normal beagles and Cocker spaniels.l'" These values were established by intradermal
pulse-labeling injections of tritiated thymidine, examination of skin biopsies, and autoradiographs. The basal cell labeling index was 1.46 ± 0.78% in beagles and 1.07 ± 0.42% in
Cocker spaniels.

Hair Colors and Types
DOG
Although hair types in dogs are extremely diverse, various authors have attempted to
classify them on the basis of color, length, type of bristle, and characteristics of the
medulla and cortex.P" Hair types among dogs can be divided into normal (intermediate
length), short, and long coats.
Normal Coat
The normal coat is typified by that seen in the German shepherd, the Welsh corgi, and
wild dogs such as wolves and coyotes. It is composed of primary hairs (coarse guard hairs
or bristles) and secondary hairs (fine hairs or undercoat). A high proportion of the hairs,
by number but not by weight, are secondary hairs.
The next two classes of hair coats are also made up of primary and secondary hairs,
but the relative sizes of the hairs and their numbers vary markedly from those of the
normal coat.
Short Coat
The short coat can be classified as coarse or fine. The coarse short coat is typified by the
Rottweiler and many of the terriers. This type of coat has a strong growth of primary
hairs and a much lesser growth of secondary hairs. The total weight of hair is lower, and
the secondary hairs, especially, weigh less and are fewer in number than those in the
normal coat. The fine short coat is exemplified by boxers, dachshunds, and miniature
pinschers. This type of coat has the largest number of hairs per unit area. The secondary
hairs are numerous and well developed, and the primary hairs are reduced in size as
compared with those of the normal coat.

8 • Structure and Function of the Skin
Long Coat

The long coat can also be arranged into two subdivisions: the fine long coat and the
woolly or coarse long coat. The fine long coat is found in the Cocker spaniel, the
Pomeranian, and the Chow Chow. This coat has a greater weight of hair per unit area
than does the normal coat, except in the toy breeds (in which the weight of the hair may
be less because it is finer). The woolly or coarse long coat is found in the poodle and in
the Bedlington terrier and the Kerry blue terrier. Secondary hairs make up 70% of the
total weight of these coats and 80% of the number of hairs; compared with other
secondary-type hairs, these are relatively coarse. The three breeds mentioned have less
tendency to shed hair than do many breeds.
The genetic aspects of coat color in dogs constitute a complex subject.U" 180 Pigmentation in individual hairs may be uniform throughout the length of the shaft, or it may
vary. In the agouti-type hair (German shepherd, Norwegian elkhound), the tip is white or
light, the heavy body is pigmented brown or black, and the base is a light yellow or redbrown. Pigment cells in the bulb of the hair deposit pigment in or between the cortical
and medullary hair cells. The amount of pigment deposited in the hair and its location
there produce different optical effects; however, there are only two types of pigment. The
black-brown pigment is called eumelanin, and the yellow-red pigment is called pheomelanin. In addition, the melanocytes of the follicle mayor may not produce pigment
throughout the period of growth. In black hair, pigment production obviously remains
active throughout the period.

CAT
The colors and types of hair coat in cats have been studied in some detail. l 52, ISS, 213 A self
(solid) cat is a single color throughout. No patterning, shading, ticking, or other variation
of color is observed, although it is common for kittens to have slightly tabby markings and
scattered white hairs that disappear with maturity. Whatever their coloring, all cats are
genetically tabbies, possessing the Abyssinian, mackerel, or blotched tabby genes, or a
combination of two of these types. Solid white is dominant over all colors but may be
associated with various abnormalities; for example, white cats with blue eyes often have
cochlear degeneration and deafness.
The tabby is the basic type of cat, the wild type from which all others evolved. The
complex tabby coloration arises from two component patterns governed by two separate
sets of genes. The underlying pattern is agouti, which is characterized by hairs with a
bluish base and black tip separated by yellow banding. The tabby genes determine
whether a cat has narrow, vertical, gently curving stripes (mackerel), larger patches
(blotch), or an Abyssinian pattern.
Tipped hair coats are characterized by hairs that have colored tips (e.g., blue, red,
black) overlying a paler color. Differences in the degree of tipping are great, with the
greatest in the smokes and least in the chinchillas (silver). Pointed hair coats are characterized by pale-colored hair on the body with darker hairs on the extremities or points
(nose, ears, feet, tail). Points arise through a temperature-dependent mechanism present
in breeds such as Siamese, Himalayan, Balinese, and Birman. In these breeds, the dark
hair color (acromelanism) is due to a temperature-dependent enzyme that converts melanin precursors into melanin by a process of oxidation.l'" With higher temperatures, the
hair is light colored; with low temperatures, it is darker. Thus, kittens are light at birth,
and cats kept indoors or in tropical climates are lighter than those kept outdoors or in
cold climates. Inflammation and hyperemia result in more lightly colored new hair. The
poor peripheral circulation that accompanies senility and shaving to remove hair often
result in more darkly colored new hair.
Multicolored coats include the tortoiseshell and piebald spotting patterns. The archetypal tortoiseshell is a patchwork of black and orange, but there is range of color variation
among torties. The hair may be chocolate (chestnut), cinnamon, blue, or lilac (lavender) in
the nonorange areas. The tortoiseshell pattern occurs in females or in males with two X
chromosomes. White spotting in piebald cats varies in degree from white gloves on the
feet, a nose smudge, or a white bib, to extensive white over most of the body.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 9
The Maltese dilution, which dilutes black to blue (gray), orange to cream, and sealpoint (Siamese) to blue-point, is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. 151 In nonMaltese cats, small melanin granules of uniform shape and size are scattered uniformly
throughout the cortex and medulla of the hair shaft, hair follicle epithelium, and epidermis. In the skin and hair from Maltese dilution cats, a nonuniform distribution of very
large, irregularly sized and shaped melanin granules results from the clumping of small
granules.
In a typical shorthaired cat, the longest primary hairs average about 4.5 cm in length.
By contrast, the silky coat of a good show cat has primary hairs that may exceed 12.5 em
in length. The shorthair is the fundamental wild type and is dominant to the others.
Various mutant hair coat types have occurred that have been perpetuated as a breed
characteristic. The rex mutant is characterized by curly hairs and occurs in two major
breeds, the Devon rex and the Cornish (German) rex. The Cornish rex lacks primary
hairs, and the Devon rex has primary hairs that resemble secondary hairs. Cornish rex
whiskers are often short and curly, but Devon rex whiskers are often absent or stubbled.
In some Devon rexes, the coat is completely absent on the chest, belly, and shoulders, a
fault many breeders try to eliminate. Cornish and Devon rexes may partially or completely
molt, especially during estrus or pregnancy, resulting in a symmetric alopecia that may be
mistaken for an endocrine derrnatosis.P' These breeds are occasionally recommended as
hypoallergenic cats to humans with animal dander hypersensitivities, but there appears to
be no scientific documentation for this claim.
The wire-hair mutation, seen in the American wirehair, is characterized by a coat that
looks and feels wiry because it is coarse, crimped, and springy. All hairs are curled in an
irregular fashion, and the awn hairs resemble a shepherd's crook.
One survey attempted to relate feline coat color to personality.P" Results suggested
that cats with solid black, black and white, or gray tabby coats tended to have good
personalities, to handle stress well, and to make excellent pets. By contrast, calicos were
most likely to be aggressive and to have litter pan problems.
There are a number of cutaneous patterns or lines that are evoked to explain certain
distributions of skin lesions encountered clinically." Voight~s lines are the boundaries of
the areas of distribution of the main cutaneous nerve stems. Langer's lines reflect the
course of blood vessels or lymphatics. Blaschke's lines form the pattern assumed by many
different nevoid and acquired skin diseases. Blaschke's lines reflect a mosaic condition
deriving either from a single mutated clone of cells originating from a postzygotic mutation or from an X-linked mutation made evident by lyonization.P' These lines follow a Vshape over the spine, an S-shape on the abdomen, an axial distribution on the limbs, and
a wavy pattern down the forehead, over and below the eyes, over the upper lip, and
behind the ear. Tension lines are determined by muscle action, connective tissue fiber
orientation and traction, and gravity.82

Footpads
The canine and feline footpad is a specialized area of integument. 13 1, 166, 180 The thick
epidermis protects against mechanical trauma, and the large fat deposits provide shockabsorbing elasticity, A copious nerve supply provides an important sensory function. Numerous atrichial sweat glands produce a secretion that may improve traction during
running and climbing and may also be important in scent marking,

• MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The microscopic anatomy and phYSiology of the skin of dogs and cats have been the
subjects of numerous studies."

"See references 77, 102, 117, 119, 135, 156, 166, 168, 170, 172, 180, 187, 188, 202, and 21.5.

I 0 • Structure and Function of the Skin

Epidermis
The outer layer of the skin, or epidermis, is composed of multiple layers of cells defined
by position, shape, polarity, morphology and state of differentiation of the keratinocytes
(Figs. 1-2, 1-3A, 1-4, 1-5, and 1-6; see also Fig. 1-16). There are four distinct cell
types within the epidermis: keratinocytes (about 85% of the epidermal cells), melanocytes
(about 5%), Langerhans' cells (3% to 8%), and Merkel's cells (about 2%), which are
associated with tylotrich pads. 65 , 180, 206 For purposes of identification, certain areas of the
epidermis are classified as layers and are named, from inner to outer, as follows:
basal layer (stratum' basale), spinous layer (stratum spinosum), granular layer (stratum
granulosum), clear layer (stratum lucidum), and horny layer (stratum corneum). In general, the epidermis of cats and dogs is thin (two to three nucleated cell layers, not
counting the horny layer) in haired skin, ranging from 0.1 to 0.5 mm in thickness or in
depth. 116, 172, 180, 188,202 The thickest epidermis is found on the footpads (see Fig. 1-4) and
nasal planum (see Fig. 1-5), where it may measure 1.5 mm. The surface of the footpad
epidermis is smooth in cats but papillated and irregular in dogs. Rete ridges (projections

FIGURE 1-2. A, Normal canine
skin, B, Normal feline skin, Note the
thin epidermis and compound hair follicle arrangement of both species.

FIGURE 1-3. A, Normal canine skin (H & E stain). B, Elastin (black) and collagen (pink) fibers (AGe stain). C, Mucin
(blue) separating dermal collagen bundles (pink) (H & E stain). D, Melanin granules (black) in keratinocytes and melanocytes C'clear cells") (H & E stain). E, Keratohyalin granules (dark blue) below stratum corneum (H & E stain). F,
Trichohyalin granules (red) in the inner root sheath of a hair follicle (H & E stain). Note vacuolated (glycogen) appearance
of outer root sheath keratinocytes. G, Trichilemmal keratinization (red) of central hair follicle (H & E stain). H, Basement
membrane zone (violet) (PAS stain).

12 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-4. A, Histologic section
of canine footpad. Note papillated surface. B, Histologic section of feline
footpad. Note smooth surface.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 13

FIGURE 1-5. Histologic section of
the nasal planum. Note the thick epidermis, dense stratum corneum, and rete
ridges.

of the epidermis into the underlying dermis) are not found in the normal hair-bearing
skin of cats and dogs. Rete ridges, however, may be found in normal footpad and nasal
planum epidermis and in the lightly haired scrotum (see Fig. 1-6).

BASAL LAYER
The stratum basale is a single row of columnar to cuboidal cells resting on the basement
membrane zone that separates the epidermis from the dermis (see Figs. 1-5, 1- 7, and
1_10).65,163,180 Most of these cells are keratinocytes, which are constantly reproducing and
pushing upward to replenish the epidermal cells above. The daughter cells move into the
outer layers of the epidermis and are ultimately shed as dead horny cells. Mitotic figures
and apoptotic keratinocytes are occasionally seen, especially in areas of skin with thicker
epidermis (e.g., nasal planum, footpad, mucocutaneous junction). There is morphologic
and functional heterogenicity in basal keratinocytes'", some populations serve primarily to
anchor the epidermis, and others serve a proliferative and reparative (stem cell) function.
The tips of the deep epidermal rete ridges (in glabrous skin) and the bulge (Wulst) region
of the hair follicle (site of attachment of the arrector pili muscle) are the presumed sites
of the epidermal and hair follicle stem cells in humans and rodents.P: 108, 109 Dogs and cats
do not have a hair follicle bulge. 45 , 50
Hemidesmosomes are junctional complexes distributed along the inner aspect of basal
keratinocytes, whose major role is epidermal-dermal adhesion. 55 , 150 The linkage of the
keratin intermediate filament (cytokeratin) network to the hemidesmosome and the basal
keratinocyte plasma membrane involves several components, including the plaque proteins
bullous pemphigoid antigen I (BPAG I or BP 230) and plectin, the transmembrane proteins
a6{34 integrin and BPAG II (collagen XVII), and laminin 5,u°, 128, 193 Various inherited
defects in the hemidesmosome-anchoring filament components are known to produce various forms of epidermolysis bullosa, and autoabs to some of the components are involved in
the pathogenesis of pemphigoid and bullous systemic lupus erythematosus.w- 128
Integrins are a large family of cell surface adhesive receptors. no, 193 These cell surface
glycoproteins are important in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, and also act as Signal
transducers through which extracellular and intracellular compartments can influence and
modify each other. Each integrin consists of a heterodimer of an ex and a {3 subunit,
which are noncovalently associated. In the epidermis, integrin expression is normally
confined to the basal layer. The integrin subunits that are most abundant in the epidermis
are CX2, CX3, {3l> CX6 and {34' Examples of keratinocyte integrin functions include: CX5{3l> which

14 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-6. Histologic section of
canine scrotal skin. Note muscle bundles
(arrow).

mediates keratinocyte adhesion to fibronectin; (X2f3t> which mediates keratinocyte adhesion
to collagens type I and IV and laminin; (X3f3t> which is a receptor for epiligrin and is
involved in adhesion to laminin; (X1f35, which mediates keratinocyte adhesion to vitronectin,
and (X5f34, which mediates keratinocyte adhesion to laminin (see Table 1-2),uo
MELANOCYTES AND MELANOGENESIS

Melanocytes, the second type of cell found in the basal layer of the epidermis, are also
found in the outer root sheath and hair matrix of hair follicles, in the ducts of sebaceous
and sweat glands, and to a lesser extent in the superficial dermis." Traditionally, melanocytes are divided structurally and functionally into two compartments: epidermal and
follicular.55, 57.111,150 Because melanocytes do not stain readily with hematoxylin and eosin
(H & E) and because they undergo artifactual cytoplasmic shrinkage during tissue processing, they appear as clear cells (see Fig. 1-7B). In general, there is one melanocyte
per 10 to 20 keratinocytes in the basal cell layer. They are derived from the neural crest
and migrate into the epidermis in early fetal life. Although melanocytes are of nondescript
appearance, with special stains, they can be shown to have long cytoplasmic extensions

'See references 51,65,77, Ill, 150, 172, 180. and 206.

Structure and Function of the Skin • I5

FIGURE 1-7. A, Dendritic melanocytes (alTow) in the basal layer of the epidermis. B, Melanocytes ("clear
cells") (arrouihead) in the stratum basale.

16 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-8. Pigmented epithelium from nasal planum. Note how melanin granules are often clustered in
"caps" dorsal to keratinocyte nuclei.

(dendrites) (see Fig. 1-7A) that weave among the keratinocytes. There is an intimate
relationship between melanocytes and keratinocytes in which both cells interact and exist
as epidermal syrnbionts in a functional and structural unit called the epidermal melanin
unit. 65 , Ill, 150. 196 Ultrastructurally, melanocytes are characterized by typical intracytoplasmic
melanosomes and premelanosomes and a cell membrane-associated basal layer lamina
(see Fig. 1-9). Most of the melanin pigment in skin is located in the basal layer of the
epidermis, but in dark-skinned animals, melanin may be found throughout the entire
epidermis as well as within superficial dermal melanocytes (see Fig. I-3D). Melanin
granules are often clustered as "caps" dorsal to keratinocyte nuclei (Fig. 1-8), presumably
a photoprotective localization.
Although the melanocyte accounts for only a small proportion of the epidermal cells,
it has a variety of important functions: (1) a cosmetic entity, participating in protective
coloration and in sexual attraction; (2) a barrier against ionizing radiation, especially
important in protection against ultraviolet light (UVL); (3) a scavenger of cytotoxic radicals and intermediates; and (4) a participant in developmental and inflammatory processes. 65 • lll, 150 Although melanin absorbs UVL over a broad spectrum, including UVA and
UVB, it is not a particularly efficient absorber of UVL. It probably photoprotects in other
ways, possibly as a quencher of free radicals generated in response to UVL.
Melanin pigments are chiefly responsible for the coloration of skin and hair. Skin
pigmentation is considered to consist of two components. Constitutive pigmentation is the
pigmentation that is genetically determined in the absence of stimulatory influences.
Facultative pigmentation is that which occurs with various stimuli (e.g., UVL, inflammation, hormones).
Melanins embrace a wide range of pigments, including the brown-black eumelanins,
yellow or red-brown pheomelanins, and other pigments whose physicochemical natures
are intermediate between the two. Pheomelanins differ from eumelanins by containing a high proportion of sulfur. Despite the different properties of the various melanins,

Structure and Function of the Skin • I 7

they all arise from a common metabolic pathway in which dopaquinone is the key intermediate.f" 65. 67
Melanogenesis takes place exclusively within melanocytes and on the specialized organelle, the melanosome.P: m. 150 Here, the specific enzyme, tyrosinase, catalizes the
conversion of tyrosine to dopa. Tyrosinase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the melanin
pathway. It is a copper-containing enzyme, is found exclusively in melanocytes, and is thus
a good specific marker for these cells. Tyrosinase is an unusual enzyme in that it has three
distinct catalytic activities. The most critical is its tyrosine hydroxylase activity, converting
tyrosine to dopa. However, it is also able to use dopa or 5,6-dihyroxyindole (DHI) as
substrates for oxidase activities. Mutations in the tyrosine structural gene are responsible
for several types of albinism.P!
Once dopa is formed, it can spontaneously autooxidize to dopaquinone without tyrosinase (though at slower rates), and continue through the melanin pathway to dopachrome,
5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid (DHICA), DHI, and indole-Sfi-quinone.P: lll, 150 Another melanocyte-specific enzyme is dopachrome tautomerase, which converts dopachrome
to DHICA.lll. 150 This conversion requires the presence of iron.
The determination to produce eumelanins or pheomelanins is under genetic contro1.27• 65• lll, 150 If sulfhydryl groups are available, pheomelanins are produced. It has been
proposed that the "switching" of melanin synthesis is mainly controlled by the levels of
tyrosinase, with high levels producing eumelanins and low levels producing pheomelanins.U!

Mammalian pigmentation is regulated at many different developmental, cellular, and
subcellular levels, and is influenced by many genes. 65• 110. i n, 150 Although melanocytes in
the skin have characteristic basal levels of function that are particular to each individual,
they are highly responsive cells that continually sample their environment and modulate
their levels of proliferation and melanogenesis. Classically, melanin production was
thought to be under the control of genetics and melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
from the pituitary gland. 57• 65. 67. 180. 196 The main pigmenting hormones from the pituitary
gland include a-MSH (ze-melanocortin), adrenal cortical stimulating hormone (corticotropin), and ~-lipotropic hormone (~-lipotropin).lll. 150 These hormones are derived from a
larger precursor molecule, proopiomelanocortin. However, the role of these hypophyseal
origin hormones in physiologic and pathologic pigmentation in mammals is largely unknown. At present, interest focuses on the theory that melanogenesis and melanocyte
proliferation and differentiation are mostly regulated locally in paracrine and autocrine
fashion.
Melanocytes express a number of cell surface receptors (e.g., intercellular adhesion
molecule I [ICAM-I]) that allow interaction with other cells in their environment, including keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, fibroblasts, lymphocytes, and macrophages. i n, 150. 206
They express receptors for and respond to (modifying their proliferation, differentiation,
and melanogenesis) growth factor (e.g., ~ fibroblast growth factor) hormones, interferons,
interleukins, eicosanoids, retinoic acid, vitamin D 3 , and a host of other cytokines. In fact,
melanocytes are able to produce some of these themselves, thus acting in an autocrine
manner. Melanocytes themselves secrete several cytokines (e.g., interleukin-8 [IL-8]) and
participate in inflammatory and immunologic reactions. Many of the precursors and intermediates of the melanin biosynthetic pathway are cytotoxic and could contribute to
cellular injury and inflammation, It can be appreciated that a highly complex interaction
exists between the cellular components of the epidermis, their respective immune cytokines, and the inflammatory mediators released in response to injury.
a-MSH is a neuroimmunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory peptide that is synthesized and released by keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells, as
well as melanocytes themselves.U! 118. 150 a-MSH cell surface receptors can also be identified on these cells. a-MSH can, hence, modulate keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation, and endothelial cell and fibroblast cytokine and collagenase production. It also
downregulates the production of proinflammatory cytokines and accessory molecules on
antigen-presenting cells (monocytes and macrophages). a-MSH is an antagonist of IL-I,
an important cytokine in the cutaneous immune response. Thus, a-MSH is part of a

18 • Structure and Function of the Skin

mediator network that modulates cutaneous inflammation and hyperproliferative skin diseases. This may be far more important than any effect it has on skin pigmentation.
Melanogenesis takes place in membrane-bound organelles called melanosomes,"! 65. 196
designated stages I through IV according to maturation (Fig. 1-9). It is often stated that
the ultrastructural hallmark of the melanocyte is the melanosome. However, it is more
accurate to say that stage I melanosomes are melanocyte specific, because later stage
melanosomes may be found in keratinocytes and other phagocytic cells."!' Melanosomes

FIGURE 1-9. Melanocyte. N, nucleus of melanocyte; arrows, melanosomes; C, collagen in the
dermis; asterisk, basal lamina (x 10,000). Insets: Melanosomes in different stages of development:
upper inset, Stage II; middle inset, Stage III; lower inset, Stage IV (X 75,000). (From Lever WF,
Schaumburg-Lever G: Histopathology of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990,
p 861.)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 19

originate from the Colgi apparatus, where the tyrosinase enzyme is formed. Stage I
melanosomes contain no melanin and are electron lucent. As melanin is progressively laid
down on protein matrices, melanosomes become increasingly electron dense. At the same
time, they migrate to the periphery of the dendrites, where transfer of melanin to
adjacent epidermal cells takes place. Transfer involves the endocytosis of the dendrite tips
of the incorporated Stage IV melanosomes by the adjacent keratinocytes. Melanocytes
eject melanosomes into keratinocytes by a unique biologic transfer process called cytocrinia. 65 Dermal melanocytes are often referred to as continent melanocytes, because they do
not transfer melanosomes as do the epidermal or secretory melanocytes. Skin color is
determined mainly by the number, size, type, and distribution of melanosomes.
At present, there are no histochemical stains that can be performed on routinely
processed skin biopsy specimens that exclusively stain melanin. III Argentaffin stains rely
on the ability of melanin to reduce silver from a silver solution (e.g., silver nitrate).
Examples of argentaffin stains include Fontana-Masson and Comori's methenamine silver.
These agents also stain neurosecretory granules and formalin pigment. Argyrophil stains
are similar to argentaffin stains, but use an external silver reducer to produce elemental
silver. An example of an argyrophil stain is Crimelius' stain. Argyrophil stains also stain
nerves, reticulum, and elastic fibers.

MERKEL'S CELLS
Merkel's cells are dendritic epidermal clear cells confined to the basal cell layer, or just
below, and occur predominently in tylotrich pads and hair follicle epithelium." These
specialized cells (slow-adapting mechanoreceptors) contain a large cytoplasmic vacuole that
displaces the cell nucleus dorsally, and their long axis is usually parallel to the skin surface
(Fig. 1-10). They possess desmosomes and characteristic dense-core cytoplasmic granules
and paranuclear whorls on electron microscopic examination (Fig. 1-11). Merkel's cells
also contain cytokeratin, neurofilaments, and neuron-specific enolase, suggesting a dual
epithelial and neural differentiation. Current evidence suggests that Merkel's cells are
derived from a primitive epidermal stem cell.65, 110, 159 Merkel's cells may have other
functions, such as influencing cutaneous blood flow and sweat production (via the release
of vasoactive intestinal peptide), coordinating keratinocyte proliferation, and maintaining
and stimulating the stem cell population of the hair follicle (hence controlling the hair
cycle).65.206

SPINOUS LAYER
The stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer) is composed of the daughter cells of the stratum
basale.t"- 170, 172, 188, 202 In haired skin, this layer is one or two cells thick. The stratum
spinosum becomes much thicker at the footpads, nasal planum, and mucocutaneous
junctions, where it may occasionally approach 20 cell layers. The cells are lightly basophilic to eosinophilic, nucleated, and polyhedral to flattened cuboidal in shape. The
keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum appear to be connected by intercellular bridges
(prickles), which are more prominent in nonhaired skin (Fig. 1-12).
Keratinocyte adhesion is mediated by four major types of adhesive and communicative
structures: desmosomes, hemidesmosomes, adherens junctions, and focal adhesions (Table
1-1) .110, 193 Hemidesmosomes and focal adhesions are located on the basal surface of basal
cells and mediate adhesion to the underlying extracellular matrix, whereas desmosomes
and adherens junctions mediate adhesion between keratinocytes in all epidermal layers.
Gap junctions serve primarily as intercellular routes of chemical communication. 110
Because of the research efforts directed at defining the pathomechanism of pemphigus, much has been learned concerning the structure and chemical composition of epidermal desmosomes.P: 110 Desmosomes are presently known to consist of keratin intermediate

·See references 65, 69, 77, 110, 169, 170, 172, 173, 180, and 206.

20 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-10. Merkel's cells (arrow)
in a tylotrich pad.

filaments and their attachment plaques, the keratinocyte plasma membrane, and the
desmosomal core (desmoglea), which is interposed between two adjacent keratinocyte
plasma membranes. Numerous desmosomal plaque proteins (desmoplakins I and II, plakoglobin, plakophilin) and desmosomal core glycoproteins (desmogleins I, II, III and desmocollins I, II, III) have been characterized. The immunohistochemical staining pattern
seen with human pemphigus foliaceus antibody is identical to that seen with an antibody
directed at desmoglein I (desmosomal core glycoprotein).
Proteins of the plakoglobin (plakoglobin, ,B-catenin), vinculin (vinculin, o-catenin), and
ezrin (talin, radixin) families are found at desmosomal and adherens junction attachments.l-''
The keratinocyte cytoskeleton consists of three types of cytoplasmic filaments: cytokeratin, actin, and microtubules (tubulinl.l!'' These filaments function in the orientation,
polarization, organelle sorting, motility, shape change, signal transduction, and structural
resilience of keratinocytes.
Ultrastructurally, keratinocytes are characterized by keratin intermediate filaments
(cytokeratin, tonofilaments) and desmosomes (Fig. 1_13).51.55. lIO Calcium and calmodulin
are crucial for desmosome and hemidesmosome formation. At least three keratinocytederived calmodulin-binding proteins participate in a flip-flop regulation (calcium concentration-dependent) of calcium-calmodulin interactions: caldesmon, desmocalmin, and spectrin. 55 Immunohistochemically, keratinocytes are characterized by the presence of
cytokeratins." All epithelia express a keratin pair: one keratin chain from the acidic
subfamily (Type I keratins, cytokeratins 9-20) and one chain from the neutral-basic sub-

Structure and Function of the Skin • 21

FIGURE I-II. Merkel's cell. N, nucleus of a Merkel's cell; asterisk indicates basal lamina; M,
mitochondria; arrows indicate specific granules of the Merkel's cell; D with pointer, desmosome
between the Merkel cell and a keratinocyte (K); C, collagen with cross-striation (x 20,000). Inset:
specific membrane-bound granules at higher magnification (X 75,000). (From Lever WF, Schaumburg-Lever G: Histopathology of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p, 863.)

22 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-12. Prickle cells from footpad showing intercellular bridges (high
power).

family (Type II keratins, cytokeratins 1- 8)." The keratin pairs change with different
epithelia and in the same epithelia at various stages of differentiation or proliferation.
Expression of a subset of these 20 different cytokeratins is more or less tissue specific. A
number of workers have published electrophoretic patterns of proteins isolated from the
keratins of a variety of animals and, on the basis of observed differences in banding
patterns, have suggested that the technique might be useful as an aid to taxonomy, animal
classification, and identification.s" The keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum synthesize
lamellar granules (keratinosomes, membrane-coating granules, Odlund bodies), which are
important in the barrier function of the epidermis (see Epidermopoiesis and Keratogenesis in this chapter). 65. 110
Keratinocytes are phagocytic (erythrocytes, melanin, melanosomes, cellular fragments,
latex beads, inorganic substances). 24

LANGERHANS' CELLS
Langerhans' cells are mononuclear, dendritic, antigen-presenting cells located basally or
suprabasally (Fig. 1-14).65, 123, 124, 126, 135. 206 They are epidermal clear cells that, like
'See references 24a, 56, 85, 110, 148, 185, and 190-193.

• Table 1-1

COMPONENTS OF ADHESION STRUCTURES

ADHESION
STRUCTURE

TRANSMEMBRANE
PROTEINS

PLAQUE PROTEINS

CYTOSKELETON
FILAMENTS

FUNCTION AND
LOCATION

Hemidesmosome

a6f34 integrin BPAGII

Plectin, BPAGI

Cytokeratin

Talin, vinculin, o-actinin, paxillin, zykin
Plakoglobin; desmoplakin I, II, IV;
desmocalmin; plakophilin
Plakoglobin, a- and f3catenin, a-actin,
vinculin

Actin

Cell-substrate adhesion;
basal cells and basal
membrane
Cell-substrate, basal
cells
Cell-cell adhesion; all
keratinocytes

(collagen Type
XVII)

Focal adhesion

f31 integrins (a2f3"
a3f3b a5(31)

Desmosome

Desmosomal cadherins
Dsg I, II, III
Dsc I, II, III

Adherens junction

Classic cadherins
(E- and P-cadherins)

BPAG, bullous pemphigoid antigen; Dsg = desmoglein; Dsc = desmocollin.

Cytokeratin

Actin

Cell-cell adhesion; all
keratinocytes (p-cadherin in basal cells
only)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 23

FIGURE 1-13. Squamous cell. N, nucleus; NU, nucleolus; T, tonofilaments, D, desmosome; M,
mitochondria (x 12,500). Inset: Desmosomes at higher magnification (X 100,000). A desmosome connecting two adjoining keratinocytes consists of nine lines: five electron-dense lines and four electronlucid lines. The two peripheral dense, thick lines (large asterisks) are the attachment plaques. The
single electron-dense line in the center of the desmosome (small asterisk) is the intercellular contact
layer. The two electron-dense lines between the intercellular contact layer and the two attachment
plaques represent the cell surface coat together with the outer leaflet of the trilaminar plasma
membrane of each keratinocyte (arrows). The two inner electron-lucid lines adjacent to the intercellular contact layer represent intercellular cement. The two outer electron-lucid lines are the central
lamina of the trilaminar plasma membrane. (From Lever WF, Schaumberg-Lever G: Histopathology
of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 858.)

24 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-14. Epidermal Langerhans' cells. They appear as suprabasilar epidermal "clear cells" (arrow) in
this biopsy from an atopic dog.

Merkel's cells, do not stain for melanin with dopa. The histochemical and immunophenotype of Langerhans' cells vary with species.F" Langerhans' cells in many species-including cats and humans-have characteristic intracytoplasmic organelles (Birbeck's or Langerhans' granules), which are observed by means of electron microscopy (Fig. 1_15).65.126
However, the Langerhans' cells studied in dogs have inconsistently contained these granules. 123. 136, 215 Birbeck granules are variously described as being zipper, rod, flask, or
tennis racket like in appearance. They form by invagination of the plasma membrane and
bound antigen, thus providing the morphologic description of the mechanism by which
Langerhans' cells internalize surface-bound antigen for processing and representation at
the surface yo Langerhans' cells are aureophilic (i.e., they stain with gold chloride). Unlike
Langherhans' cells in humans, those in dogs and cats are S-lOO protein and ATPase
negative. They have Fe fragment (Fc)-IgG and complement 3 (C3) receptors, high affinity
receptors for IgE, and they synthesize and express antigens associated with the immune
response gene. In the dog, Langerhans' cells are CDla,b,c, CDlla,c, CDI8, CD45,
ICAM-I, MHC class II, and vimentin positive. 1. 124. 136 They are CD4 and CD90 (Thy-L)
negative, which distinguishes them from dermal dendrocytes. In the cat, Langerhans' cells
are CDla, CD4, CD18, and MHC class II positive.P" These cells are of bone marrow
origin, of monocyte-histiocyte lineage, and serve antigen-processing and alloantigen-stimulating functions. Following ultraviolet light exposure, epidermal Langerhans' cells are
decreased in density and altered morphologically, resulting in an immunosuppressive
environment and antigen-specific tolerance/" Topical or systemic glucocorticoids are
known to depress Langerhans' cell numbers and function as well as other cutaneous and
systemic immune responses." The areas of photoimmunology and photocarcinogenesis are
receiving much attention, especially because they are relevant to the pathogenesis of skin
cancer/" Studies in humans, dogs, and cats have shown that the number of Langerhans'
cells per unit of skin varies from one area of skin to another in the same individual,

Structure and Function of the Skin • 25

FIGURE 1- 1S. Electron micrograph of an epidermal Langerhans' cell. (From Elder D,
et al: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th ed. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, 1998, p
1021.)

emphasizing the need to use adjacent normal skin as a control when counting Langerhans'
cells in skin lesions. 65 , 123, 125, 126

THE SKIN AS AN IMMUNOLOGIC ORGAN
The epidermis functions as the most peripheral outpost of the immune system (see Chap.
8). Langerhans' cells, keratinocytes, epiderrnotropic T lymphocytes, and draining periph-

26 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-16. Horny layer (1),
granular layer (2), and prickle cell layer
(3) from the nasal planum (high power).

eral lymph nodes are thought to form collectively an integrated system of skin-associated
lymphoid tissue that mediates cutaneous immunosurveillance.v- 196 Langerhans' cells (see
previous discussion) stimulate the proliferation of relevant helper T lymphocytes by the
presentation of antigen; they also induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes directed to allogeneic
and modified self-determinants, produce IL-l and other cytokines, contain numerous
enzymes, and are phagocytic.P: 110, 196
The keratinocyte also plays an active role in epidermal immunity.65, llO, 196 Keratinocytes (1) produce IL-l, (2) produce various cytokines (e.g., IL-3, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and interferon), (3) are phagocytic, and (4) can express antigens associated with the
immune response gene in a variety of lymphocyte-mediated skin diseases (presumably as a
result of interferon-y secretion by activated lymphocytesj.P" llO, 196
Gamma and delta T lymphocytes are rare in normal canine skin but common in
various immune-mediated and inflammatory dermatoses.P

GRANULAR LAYER
The stratum granulosum is variably present in haired skin; it ranges from one to two cells
thick in areas where it occurs.'?" 172, 188, 202 In nonhaired skin or at the infundibulum of
hair follicles, the stratum granulosum may be four to eight cells thick (Fig. 1-16). Cells in
this layer are flattened and basophilic, and they contain shrunken nuclei and large, deeply
basophilic keratohyalin granules in their cytoplasm (see Fig. 1-3E). Keratohyalin granules
are not true granules; they lack a membrane and are more accurately described as
insoluble aggregates. Keratohyalin granules are the morphologic equivalents of the structural protein profilaggrin, which is the precursor of filaggrin 65 and is synthesized in the
stratum granulosum. The function of keratohyalin granules is incompletely understood, but
it is thought to be concerned with keratinization and barrier function. The sulfur-rich
component of keratohyalin granules has been implicated as a precursor to the cornified
cell envelope. Filaggrin has at least two functions. First, it aggregates, packs, and aligns
keratin filaments and produces the matrix between the keratin filaments in the corneocytes. Second, it is a source of free amino acids, which are important for the normal
hydration of the stratum corneum.
Loricrin is synthesized in the stratum granulosum in association with keratohyalin
granules and is involved in the binding of keratin filaments together in the corneocyte and

Structure and Function of the Skin • 27

FIGURE 1-17. Stratum lucidum (arrow) in footpad epithelium.

in anchoring them to the cross-linked envelope. ISO Another ultrastructural feature that
characterizes granular cells are clustered lamellar granules at the margins of the cells.
In rodents, two morphologic forms of keratohyalin granules occur.U? The P-F granule
is irregularly shaped and contains profilaggrin, whereas the L-granule is smaller, rounded,
and contains loricrin.

CLEAR LAYER
The stratum lucidum is a fully keratinized, compact, thin layer of dead cells.F" 172, 188, 202
This layer is anuclear, homogeneous, and hyaline like, and it contains refractile droplets
and a semifluid substance called eleidin (Fig. 1-17). It differs histochemically from the
stratum corneum by being rich in protein-bound lipids. The stratum lucidum is best
developed in the footpads; it is less developed in the nasal planum and is absent from all
other areas of normal skin. The stratum lucidum has also been called the stratum
conjunctum.

HORNY LAYER
The stratum corneum is the outer layer of terminally differentiated keratinocytes that is
constantly being shed. 10 7 , 170, 172, 188,202 It is a multilayered zone of comeocytes suspended
in an extracellular lipid matrix, often likened to a series of bricks (comeocytes) bonded by
mortar (lipids).'!" This layer, which consists of flattened, anuclear eosinophilic cells (cor-

28 • Structure and Function of the Skin
neocytes), is thicker in lightly haired or glabrous skin (see Figs. 1-4, 1-5, 1-7B, and 116). Its gradual desquamation is normally balanced by proliferation of the basal cells,
which maintains a constant epidermal thickness. Corneocytes contain a variety of humectants and natural sunscreens that are synthesized from proteins. 150
The terminally differentiated corneocyte has a highly specialized structure in the cell
periphery, the cell envelope, which assumes protective functions.s- 107. 150 It develops
beneath the plasma membrane of stratified epidermal cells, cells of the inner root sheath
and medulla of the hair follicle, and the cuticle of the claw. The corneocyte has no true
cell membrane because it contains no phospholipids. Cell envelope formation is associated
with the increased activity of calcium-dependent epidermal or hair follicle transglutaminases that catalyze the cross-linking of soluble and particulate protein precursors into
large, insoluble polymers. Major cytoplasmic protein precursors of the cell envelope
synthesized in the stratum spinosum include involucrin, keratolinin, pancornulin, cornifin,
and loricrin. 65 , 103, 107, 110, 150, 185 The impermeable cornified envelope provides structural
support to the cell and resists invasion by microorganisms and deleterious environmental
agents. The stratum corneum has also been called the stratum dysjunctum.
In routinely processed sections, the stratum corneum varies in thickness from 3 to 35
/Lm in cats and from 5 to 1500 /Lm in dogs. However, clipping and histologic preparation
involving fixation, dehydration, and paraffin embedding result in the loss of about one half
of the stratum corneum. The stratum corneum of canine truncal skin, when measured in
cryostat sections, was found to have a mean thickness of 47 cell layers that measured 13.3
/Lm. 116 The loose, basketweave appearance of the stratum corneum is an artifact of fixation
and processing. 51, 116, 127
Transglutaminases are a superfamily of enzymes that are important in apoptosis,
keratinization, and hair follicle formation." Two members of the superfamily-keratinocyte transglutaminase and epidermal transglutaminase-mediate the sequential cross-linking of the cornified cell envelope precursor proteins, such as involucrin, cytostan A, elafin,
and loricrin. Transglutaminases are chiefly expressed in the stratum granulosum and upper
stratum spinosum, and require catalytic amino acids and calcium. Faulty keratinocyte
transglutaminase expression is one cause of ichthyosis in humans."
Topographic studies have shown that the epidermal surface varies from gently undulating on the densely haired skin of the back to heavily folded on the skin of the
abdomen.P" 170 The hairs arise from the follicle infundibula, which are seen as pits in the
skin. At their bases, the hairs tend to be joined by amorphous material that can also be
seen around the squames adhering to hairs. The surface of the stratum corneum is
uneven, especially in the hairy areas (see Fig. 1-19). It is covered with a homogeneous
film that tends to conceal the structure of the squames and their intercellular junctions.
Globular masses that are partially concealed by this film can be seen. On closer examination, the surface can be seen to be composed of hexagonal cells and an amorphous
substance that appears to be oozing to the surface of the margins of the cells. The bases
of the hair follicle infundibula are sealed by an amorphous substance (sebaceous and
cutaneous lipids) and squames. No evidence was found to suggest that sebum flows from
the hair pore to the interfollicular region, which suggested that rubbing and grooming
were important in spreading this emulsion over the skin. Hair growth may be important in
"pushing" the sebum out of the pilar canal. Recent microautoradiographic studies of the
disposition of topical fipronil in dogs have shown that sebum does, indeed, move over the
epidermal surface." It has been suggested that the thinner, more compact canine stratum
corneum with less intercellular lipid material-compared with other species-may partially explain the higher incidence of bacterial pyoderma in dogs in comparison with other
species.
Lipids play an important role in the differentiation, structure, and function of the
epidermis-"- 52. 6", 107 Epidermal lipid composition changes dramatically during keratinization, beginning with large amounts of phospholipids and ending with predominantly
ceramides, cholesterol, and fatty acids. Epidermal surface lipids originate from maturing
comeocytes, which contain about six times the amount of intracellular lipid as keratinocytes in the stratum basale. Skin surface lipids of cats and dogs were studied by thin-layer

Structure and Function of the Skin • 29

chromatography and found to contain more sterol esters, free cholesterol, cholesterol
esters, and diester waxes but fewer triglycerides, monoglycerides, free fatty acids, monester waxes, and squalene than those of humans. It was suggested that the surface lipids of
cats and dogs are mainly of epidermal origin, whereas those of humans are mainly of
sebaceous gland origin. Skin surface lipids can be studied qualitatively by various extraction techniques (e.g., sebutape) or quantitatively using the lipometer or sebumeter."
The stratum corneum contains antigenic or superantigenic material normally sequestered from the immune system that induces T lymphocyte activation when released
following wounding and in disease." This T lymphocyte activation and resultant inflammatory response may playa role in a range of skin pathologies.

EPIDERMOPOIESIS AND KERATOGENESIS
Normal epidermal homeostasis requires a finely tuned balance between growth and differentiation of keratinocytes. This balance must be greatly shifted in the direction of proliferation in response to injury and then must return to a state of homeostasis with healing. In
addition, epidermal keratinocytes have important functions as regulators of cutaneous
immunity and inflammation.
The most important product of the epidermis is keratin (from the Greek keratos,
meaning "hom"), a highly stable, disulfide bond-containing fibrous protein. This substance is the major barrier between animal and environment, the so-called miracle wrap of
the body. Prekeratin, the fibrous protein synthesized in the keratinocytes of the stratum
basale and stratum spinosum, appears to be the precursor of the fully differentiated
stratum corneum protems.w- 196 Keratins have classically been divided into soft keratins
(skin) and hard keratins (hair, claw) and a-keratins (skin, hair) and l3-keratins (scale,
feather). 150
The epidermis is ectodermal in origin and normally undergoes an orderly pattern of
proliferation, differentiation, and keratinization." The factors controlling this orderly epidermal pattern are incompletely understood, but the protein kinase C/phospholipase C
second messenger system, the calcium/calmodulin second messenger system, the receptorlinked tyrosine kinases, and the adenylate cyclase/cAMP-dependent protein kinases are
important in coupling extracellular signals to essential biological processes such as the
immune response, inflammation, differentiation, and proliferation." Among the intrinsic
factors known to playa modulating role in these processes are the dermis, EGF, fibroblast
growth factors, insulin-like growth factors, colony-stimulating factors, platelet-derived
growth factor, TGFs, neuropeptides, interleukins, tumor necrosis factor, epidermal chalone, epibolin, interferons, acid hydrolases, arachidonic acid metabolites, proteolytic enzymes (endopeptidases and exopeptidases or peptidases), and various hormones (particularly epinephrine, vitamin D 3 , and cortisol).65, 149, 180 In addition, there appears to be a host
of hormones and enzymes that can induce, increase, or both induce and increase the
activity of the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase. 57 This enzyme is essential for the biosynthesis of polyamines (putrescine, spermidine, and spermine), which encourage epidermal
proliferation. Numerous nutritional factors are also known to be important for normal
keratinization, including protein, fatty acids, zinc, copper, vitamin A, and the B vitamins."
There are four distinct cellular events in the process of cornification'": (1) keratinization (synthesis of the principal fibrous proteins of the keratinocyte), (2) keratohyalin
synthesis (including the histidine-rich protein filaggrin); (3) the formation of the highly
cross-linked, insoluble stratum corneum cornified cell envelope (including the structural
protein involucrin); and (4) the generation of neutral, lipid-enriched intercellular domains,
resulting from the secretion of distinctive lamellar granules. The lamellar granules are
synthesized primarily within the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and are then
displaced to the apex and periphery of the cell as it reaches the stratum granulosum (Fig.
1-18). They fuse with the plasma membrane and secrete their contents (phospholipid,

'See references 37, 65, 114, 139, 140, 142, 183, and 205.

30 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-18. Lamellar granules. (From Goldsmith LA, ed: Physiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology of the
Skin, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991. Courtesy of K. Holbrook.)

ceramides, free fatty acids, hydrolytic enzymes, and sterols). Intercellular lipids then
undergo substantial alterations and assume an integral role in the regulation of stratum
corneum barrier function and desquamation.
Epidermal lipids directly or indirectly influence the proliferative and biochemical
events in normal and diseased skin and mediate interactions between the "dead" stratum
corneum and the "living" nucleated epidermal layers.65 , 107, ISO Dynamic transformations in
lipid composition and structure occur as cells migrate through the epidermis. Ceramides
are the most important lipid component for lamellar arrangement in the stratum corneum
and in barrier function. Polyunsaturated fatty acids are important because they are incorporated into the ceramides. Arachidonic acid is bound to the phospholipid in cell membranes and is the important precursor of eicosanoids. The eicosanoids are vital for epidermal homeostasis and the pathogenesis of inflammatory dermatoses. Lipids are important in
barrier function, stratum corneum water-holding, cohesion and desquamation of corneocytes, and control of epidermal proliferation and differentiation.
The main changes in epidermal lipid composition are the replacement of phospholipids by ceramides, an increase in free sterols, and a large increase in free fatty acids at the
expense of triglyceride and phospholipid.P"- 150 This transformation of lipid provides the
outer epidermal layers with a much more stable, waxy, impermeable lipid barrier. Cera-

Structure and Function of the Skin • 3 I

mides playa crucial role in plasticizing the horny layer to allow stretching and bending by
fluidizing the barrier lipids.
The clinical importance of epidermal lipids in disorders of keratinization is illustrated
by the following examples: (1) the scaling and poor barrier function due to abnormal
lamellar granules, defective ceramides, and deranged eicosanoid production associated
with essential fatty acid deficiency; (2) the scaling and poor barrier function due to the
loss of ceramides, cholesterol, fatty acids, waxes, and sterols associated with exposure to
solvents and detergents; (3) the poor desquamation due to the steroid sulfatase defect and
resultant increased accumulation of cholesterol sulfate associated with recessive X-linked
ichthyosis of humans; (4) the scaling and abnormal lipid packing due to a defect in
phytanic acid oxidase production in Refsum disease humans; (5) the hyperkeratosis and
defective lamellar granules in Harlequin ichthyosis of humans; and (6) the scaling and
poor barrier function due to the inhibition of epidermal cholesterol synthesis seen with
the administration of hypocholesterolemic agents in humans.l'" 150
Tritiated thymidine labeling techniques have shown that the turnover (cell renewal)
time for the viable epidermis (stratum basale to stratum granulosum) of dogs is approximately 22 days.P Clipping the hair shortened the epidermal turnover time to approximately 15 days.'! Surgically induced wounds in the skin of normal dogs greatly increased
epidermal mitotic activity.212 Epidermal turnover time in seborrheic Cocker spaniels and
Irish setters was approximately 7 days."
The growth characteristics, differentiation, cell surface markers, and morphology of
canine keratinocytes grown in vitro have been reported.189-192. 208-210 Cultured canine
keratinocytes express pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus foliaceus, and bullous pemphigoid
antigens, and deposit laminin and Type IV collagen."? The use of cultured canine keratinocytes should provide a useful model for in vitro studies of epidermal kinetics, the
pathogenesis of various dermatologic diseases, and the cutaneous effects of various pharmacologic agents.

CUTANEOUS ECOLOGY
The skin forms a protective barrier without which life would be impossible, This defense
has three components: physical, chemical, and microbial.t" Hair forms the first physical
line of defense to prevent contact of pathogens with the skin and to minimize external
physical or chemical insult to the skin. Hair may also harbor microorganisms.
The stratum corneum forms the basic physical defense barrier. Its thick, tightly
packed keratinized cells are permeated by an emulsion of sebum, sweat, and epidermal
lipids that is concentrated in the outer layers of keratin, where it also functions as a
physical barrier. In addition to its physical properties, the emulsion provides a chemical
barrier to potential pathogens. Water-soluble substances in the emulsion include inorganic
salts and proteins that inhibit microorganisms. Sodium chloride and the antiviral glycoprotein interferon, albumin, transferrin, complement, glucocorticoid, and immunoglobulins
are in the emulsion.P'- 116. 180 Skin surface lipids are not constant in quantity or composition, and sebum is constantly being decomposed by resident flora into free fatty acids,
some of which kill bacteria and fungi.35 In the normal skin of dogs, (1) IgG and IgM are
found in the interstitial spaces in the dermis, in dermal blood vessels, and in hair papillae;
(2) IgM is found at the basement membrane zone of the epidermis (Fig. 1-19), hair
follicles, and sebaceous glands; (3) IgA is found in the epitrichial sweat glands (suggesting
that it functions as a cutaneous secretory immunoglobulin); and (4) C3 is found in the
stratum corneum and in the dermal interstitial spaces. 5O, 61, 175, 176 In the cat, IgM has been
detected at the basement membrane zone of the nasal planum.I" The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, secretory component, is expressed and synthesized by keratinocytes and
the secretory and ductal epithelium of sweat glands. 80 This receptor can interact with IgA
and IgM; this interaction may be a mechanism for protecting the skin from microbial
agents and foreign antigens.
A relationship exists between the acidity of the skin surface ("acid mantle" of the skin
surface) and its antimicrobial activity.F' The buffer capacity of the skin surface against

32 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1- 19. IgM at the
basement membrane zone of normal canine nasal planum.

external and internal acidifYing and alkalinizing effects depends on several buffering
systems, including lactic acid in sweat, ammonia in sweat, and amino acids. In general,
inflammation causes the skin surface pH to switch from acid or neutral to alkaline. Skin
surface pH is typically measured by a glass electrode technique (pH meter);"
The Single factor with the greatest influence on the flora is the degree of hydration of
the stratum corneum.v- 33, 65 Increasing the quantity of water at the skin surface (increased
ambient temperature, increased relative humidity, or occlusion) enormously increases the
number of microorganisms. In general, the moist or greasy areas of the skin support the
greatest populations of microorganisms. In addition to effects on microflora, epidermal
water content appears to be important in the regulation of epidermal growth, keratinization, and permeability." Studies of skin hydration are typically conducted with an evaporimeter and a comeometer.F
The equilibrium between keratin and water is essential for keratinized tissues to fulfill
their role correctly/" The stratum corneum can increase its thickness by over 100% by
taking up water. By comparison hairs can only increase their thickness by about 15%. This
difference may be explained by the relatively low concentration of cystine in stratum
corneum compared with that of hairs.P Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) represents the
water vapor evaporating from the skin surface, and reflects the integrity of the stratum
corneum,21,52 A characteristic of healthy skin is that the relationship between TEWL and
hydration (water-holding capacity) remains directly proportional. In pathologic skin, the
correlation between TEWL and stratum corneum water content shows an inverse relationship due to damaged skin barrier function or alterations in keratinization (increased
TEWL, decreased hydration).
In dogs, baseline skin hydration was different at different sites and lower in dry skin
than in normal skin,32 In normal Newfoundlands, the relative humidity of the coat was
about 50% on the rump, chest wall, and lateral thigh, and about 70% beneath the tail and
on the ventral neck." No differences in relative humidity were seen with different coat
colors or between males and females, but relative humidity beneath the tail and on the
ventral neck did increase with age. 33 In dogs subjected to artificial heat or bright sunshine,
mean skin temperature increased from about 35°C to about 39°C, and the water content
of the coat almost doubled."
The normal skin microflora also contributes to skin defense. Bacteria and, occasionally, yeasts and filamentous fungi are located at the skin surface, in the superficial layers of

Structure and Function of the Skin • 33

the epidermis (especially in the intercellular spaces of the stratum corneum), and in the
infundibulum of hair follicles. 143, 164 The normal flora is a mixture of bacteria that live in
symbiosis. The flora may change with different cutaneous environments, which include
such factors as pH, salinity, moisture, albumin level, and fatty acid level. The close
relationship between the host and the microorganisms enables bacteria to occupy microbial niches and inhibit colonization by invading organisms. Interactions between cutaneous
microbes may be classified as follows 143:
1. Unilateral and reciprocal antagonism ("interference"). Production of growth condi-

tions by one organism that are unfavorable for another. Proposed mechanisms
include consumption of nutrients, generation of unfavorable redox potential or pH,
occupation of tissue receptors, or production of inhibitors (enzymes, antibiotics, or
bacteriocins) .
2. Reciprocal enhancement ("synergism"). Nutrients, such as amino acids, made available by the actions of one organism may allow "cross-feeding" by others. A possible
example of this phenomenon is the frequent finding of increased populations of
both Staphylococcus intermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis in lesional skin.
3. Neutral association.
The keratinocyte synthesizes various antimicrobial peptides (e.g., cathelicidins and /3defensins), which form a barrier for innate host protection against microbial pathogens
(bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoal." These peptides also appear to function in regulating
cell proliferation, extracelluar matrix production, and cellular immune responses.
Some organisms are believed to live and multiply on the skin, forming a permanent
population; these organisms are known as residents, and they may be reduced in number
but not eliminated by degerming methods.f" 143. 164 The resident skin flora is not spread
out evenly over the surface but is aggregated in microcolonies of various sizes. Other
microorganisms, called transients, are merely contaminants acquired from the environment
and can be removed by Simple hygienic measures. A third class of organisms, whose
behavior falls between that of residents and transients, has been called the nornads.v'" 164
These organisms are able to colonize and reproduce for short periods of time and can
take advantage of changes in the microenvironment of the skin surface. Thus, they
frequently become established and proliferate on the skin surface and deeper.
Most studies of the normal microbial flora of the skin of cats and dogs have been
strictly qualitative. The skin is an exceedingly effective environmental sampler, providing a
temporary haven and way station for all sorts of organisms. Thus, only repeated quantitative studies allow the researcher to make a reliable distinction between resident and
transient bacteria. It is still controversial as to which microorganisms are truly residents on
canine and feline skin, because most studies have been short term and have failed to
describe the dynamic situation.l'"
In cats, most studies indicate that Micrococcus spp., coagulase-negative staphylococci,
a-hemolytic streptococci, and Acinetobacter spp. are normal residents of the skin (see
Chap. 4).]()'5, 172, 180 Coagulase-negative and coagulase-positive staphylococci are often isolated from the skin of normal cats. 44 , 48 Of the coagulase-negative staphylococci, S. simulans was isolated most frequently and is probably a normal resident. S. capitis, S. epidermidis, S. haemolyticus, S. hominis, S. sciuri, and S. warneri were isolated primarily from
household cats as opposed to cattery cats, suggesting that cats acquire these species of
staphylococci through human contact. Of the coagulase-positive staphylococci, S. aureus
and S. intermedius were isolated more commonly from household cats than from cattery
cats. Cats may be asymptomatic carriers of the dermatophyte Microsporum canis as well
(see Chap. 5).172
In dogs, most studies indicate that Micrococcus spp., coagulase-negative staphylococci,
/3-hemolytic streptococci, and Acinetobacter spp. are normal residents of the skin (see
Chap. 4).180 Coagulase-negative and coagulase-positive staphylococci (especially S. epidermidis, S. xylosus, and S. intermedius) are regularly isolated from the skin and haircoat of
normal dogs, and there are no significant quantitative or qualitative differences in the
staphylococci of skin and hair or between species of staphylococci and body site. I 64 , 180 The

34 • Structure and Function of the Skin
anal, nasal, and oral mucocutaneous regions are also important sites of S. intermedius
carriage.164. 180 In fact, it has been suggested that, perhaps, S. intermedius is a resident of
mucosae and is spread to skin and hair coat by grooming activity.l'" Propionibacterium
aenes can also be found on the skin surface and in the hair follicles of dogs in sufficient
numbers to be considered part of the normal canine flora. l64 In addition, it is well known
that many saprophytic fungi-including M. pachydermatis, Alternaria spp., Aspergillus
spp., and Penicillium spp.-can be cultured from the skin and hair of normal dogs and
cats (see Chap. 5).180
Recent studies in normal dogs revealed the following: (1) the highest population sites
for Micrococcus spp. and coagulase-negative staphylococci were at the skin surface, and
these organisms could be considered to be residents; (2) Clostridium spp. were present on
the skin surface and in hair follicles, and could be considered to be residents; and (3)
gram-negative aerobes were present on the skin surface, in hair follicles, and at higher
counts on proximal hair shafts, indicating that they could be residents.l'" Interestingly, S.
intermedius was present in higher numbers on distal versus proximal hair shafts, but the
organism was also present in higher numbers in the hair follicle versus the skin surface.P'
This suggests the possibility of two populations of S. intermedius.

EPIDERMAL HISTOCHEMISTRY
Histochemical studies of normal cat and dog epidermis have demonstrated distinct oxidative enzyme activity in all layers except the stratum corneum.w 129. 130. 180 In addition,
strong reactions to nonspecific esterases were demonstrated, especially in the stratum
granulosum. Oxidative enzymes that were demonstrated included cytochrome Oxidase,
succinate dehydrogenase, malate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, lactate dehydrogenase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate, nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide, and monoamine oxidase. Hydrolytic enzymes
that were demonstrated included acid phosphatase, arylsulfatase, {3-glucuronidase, and
leucine aminopeptidase. Positive reactions for cholinesterases were not observed. Thus,
the enzyme pattern of normal cat and dog epidermis shows only limited similarities to that
of humans, especially regarding esterase distribution.

BASEMENT MEMBRANE ZONE
Basement membrane zones are dynamic structures that undergo constant remodeling
and are the physicochemical interface between the epidermis and other skin structures
(appendages, neural, vascular, smooth muscle) and the underlying or adjacent connective
tissue (dermis).56. 65. 150. 193. 196 This zone is important in (1) anchoring the epidermis to
the dermis, (2) maintaining a functional and proliferative epidermis, (3) maintaining
tissue architecture, (4) wound healing, (5) functioning as a barrier, and (6) regulating
nutritional transport between epithelium and connective tissue. Basement membranes
influence many aspects of cell and tissue behavior, including adhesion, cytoskeletal organization, migration, and differentiation. The basement membrane zone is often poorly
differentiated in H & E preparations, but it stains nicely with periodic acid-Schiff stain
(see Fig. 1-3 H).170. 172. 188.203 It is most prominent in nonhaired areas of the skin and at
mucocutaneous junctions. As observed by light microscopy, the basement membrane zone
comprises only the fibrous zone of the sublamina densa area and is about 20 times thicker
than the actual basal lamina.
Ultrastructurally, the basement membrane zone can be divided into the following
four components, proceeding from epidermis to dermis (Fig. 1-20): (1) the basal cell
plasma membrane, (2) the lamina lucida (lamina rara), (3) the lamina densa (basal lamina),
and (4) the sublamina densa area (lamina fibroreticularis), which includes the anchoring
fibrils and the dermal microfibril bundles. The first three components appear to be
primarily of epidermal origin. The epidermal basement membrane is composed of a wide
variety of glycoproteins and other macromolecules. Presently recognized basement membrane zone components, their localization, and their presumed functions are listed in

Structure and Function of the Skin • 35

FIGURE 1-20. Epidermal-dermal junction. H, hemidesmosome;
LL, lamina lucida. Anchoring fibrils
(AF) form a meshwork beneath the
lamina densa. A dermal macrofibril
bundle (DMB) extends from the
basal lamina (BL) into the dermis
(x 49,700). Inset: Sub-basal lamina
fibrous components of the epidermal-dermal junction. Anchoring fibrils (arrow) with a central, asymmetric, cross-banded section. AF,
interlocking meshwork of anchoring fibrils (x 86,000). (From Briggaman R, Wheeler CE Jr: The epidermal-dermal junction. J Invest
Dermatol 65:71-84, 1975.)

Table 1_2.56 , 65, 89, 90, 150, 193 It can be appreciated that the basement membrane is a
veritable "soup" of interactive molecules with focal and regional variation that probably
reflects functional differences. The involvement of the basement membrane zone in many
important dermatologic disorders (pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa, and lupus erythematosus) and wound healing has prompted most of the current research interest.

Dermis
The dermis (corium) is an integral part of the body's connective tissue system and is of
mesodermal origin. 65 , 150 It is a composite system of insoluble fibers and soluble polymers
that takes the stresses of movement and maintains shape. The insoluble fibers are collagens and elastin, and the major soluble macromolecules are proteoglycans and hyaluronan.
The fibrous components resist tensile forces, whereas the soluble macromolecules resist or
dissipate compressive forces.
In areas of thick-haired skin, the dermis accounts for most of the depth, whereas the
epidermis is thin. In very thin skin, the decreased thickness results from the thinness of
the dermis. The dermis is composed of fibers, ground substance, and cells (Fig. 1-21). It

36 • Structure and Function of the Skin
• Table 1-2

CHARACTERISTICS OF BASEMENT MEMBRANE ZONE
COMPONENTS

COMPONENT

LOCALIZATION

FUNCTION

Bullous pemphigoid antigens

Basal cell hemidesmosome and
lamina lucida
Lamina lucida
Lamina lucida (partly lamina
densa)
Basal cell hemidesmosome and
lamina lucida
Lamina lucida
Lamina lucida (partly lamina
densa)
Lamina densa and anchoring
plaques
Lamina densa (partly lamina
lucida)
Lamina densa
Lamina densa
Lamina densa and lamina lucida
Sublamina densa (partly lamina densa)
Sublamina densa
Sublamina densa
Sublamina densa
Sublamina densa
Anchoring fibrils
Anchoring fibrils
Anchoring fibrils

Adherence

Cicatricial pemphigoid antigen
Laminin I
Laminin 5
(niceinlkalinin/epiligrin)
Laminin 6
Nidogen (entactin)
Type IV collagen
Type V collagen
Heparan sulfate
Chondroitin-6-sulfate
Fibronectin
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita antigen
Type VI collagen
Linkin
Fibrtllin
Tenascin
Type VII collagen
AFI
AF2

Adherence
Adherence, promote keratinocyte proliferation
and differentiation
Adherence
Adherence
Adherence (link laminin and type IV collagen)
Adherence, nenvorking

?
Networking, filtration
Networking, filtration
Networking
Adherence
Stabilization of connective tissue
Stabilization of connective tissue
Stabilization of connective tissue
Stabilization of connective tissue
Anchorage
Anchorage
Anchorage

also contains the epidermal appendages, arrector pili muscles, blood and lymph vessels,
and nerves. Because the normal haired skin of cats and dogs does not have epidermal rete
ridges, dermal papillae are not usually seen. Thus, a true papillary and reticular dermis, as
described for humans, is not present in cats and dogs. The terms superficial and deep
dermis are preferred. The dermis accounts for most of the tensile strength and elasticity
of the skin; it is involved in the regulation of cell growth, proliferation, adhesion, migration, and differentiation, and it modulates wound healing and the structure and function
of the epidermis.s''- 150 The dermis of scrotal skin is unique in that it contains numerous
large smooth muscle bundles (see Fig. 1-6). Most of the dermal extracellular matrix
(fibers and ground substance) is synthesized by fibroblasts, which respond to a variety of
stimuli such as growth factors elaborated by keratinocytes, inflammatory cells, and fibroblasts themselves.P: 150

DER.MAL FIBER.S
The dermal fibers are formed by fibroblasts and are collagenous, reticular, and elastic.
Collagenous fibers (collagen) have great tensile strength and are the largest and most
numerous fibers (accounting for approximately 90% of all dermal fibers and 80% of the
dermal extracellular matrix) (see Figs. 1-3B and 1-26). They are thick bands composed
of multiple protein fibrils and are differentially stained by Masson's trichrome. Collagen is
a family of related molecules whose diverse biological roles include morphogenesis, tissue
repair, cellular adhesion, cellular migration, chemotaxis, and platelet aggregation. 55 Collagen contains two unusual amino acids-hydroxylysine and 4-hydroxyproline-whose levels
in urine have been used as indices of collagen turnover. Reticular fibers (reticulin) are
fine, branching structures that closely approximate collagen with age. They can be detected best with special silver stains. Elastin fibers are composed of Single fine branches
that possess great elasticity and account for about 4% of the dermal extracellular matrix.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 37

FIGURE 1-21. Normal dermis.
Collagen bundles and occasional fibroblasts (arrow).

They are well visualized by Verhoeff's and van Cieson's elastin stains (see Fig. 1-3B). The
two components of elastic fibers are amorphous elastin, which contains two unique crosslinked amino acids (desmosine and isodesmosine) that are not found in other mammalian
proteins.s" and microfibrils, which are composed of fibrillin and type VI collagen.": 150 The
remarkable strength of elastic fibers is derived from the unusual cross-linking of desmosine and isodesmosine. The precursor to elastin is tropoelastin.
There are numerous (at least 17) genetically and structurally different types of collagen molecules.P- 150 Only three collagen types are fibrillar: types I, III, and V collagen
predominate in the dermis and account for approximately 87%, 10%, and 3%, respectively, of the dermal collagen. Type VI collagen is present as microfibrils and has presumed structural and communication functions. Types I, III, V, and VI collagen appear to
be distributed uniformly throughout the dermis. Types III and V collagen are also concentrated around blood vessels. Types IV (lamina densa) and V (lamina lucida) collagen are
found in the basement membrane zone, and Type VII collagen is found in the anchoring
fibrils of the basement membrane zone. Types XII and XIV collagen are called fibrilassociated collagens with interrupted triple helices (FACIT), and at present, their function
is unclear. The biosynthesis of collagen is a complex process of gene transposition and
translation, intracellular modifications, packaging and secretion, extracellular modifications,
and fibril assembly and cross-linking. Collagen abnormalities may result from genetic
defects; from deficiencies of vitamin C, iron, and copper; and from l3-aminopropionitrile
poisoning (lathyrism). Collagen synthesis is stimulated by ascorbic acid (vitamin C),
TGF-I3, IL-1, insulin-like growth factor 1 (somatomedin C), insulin-like growth factor 2,
superoxide generating systems, and bleomycin.s" Collagen synthesis is inhibited by glucocorticoids, retinoids, vitamin D 3 , parathormone, prostaglandin E 2 , interferon-y, D-penicillamine, and minoxidil.
Collagenases occupy a crucial position in both the normal and pathologic remodeling
of collagen. 55 • 150 In the skin, a number of cell types contribute to connective tissue
destruction by their capacity to synthesize and release collagenase. Dermal fibroblasts are
the major source of skin collagenase under normal conditions of remodeling as well as in
many pathologic conditions. However, under certain conditions, keratinocytes, neutrophils,
eosinophils, and macrophages can release a variety of proteolytic enzymes, including
collagenase, and contribute to local connective tissue destruction in disease. Other degradative enzymes produced by fibroblasts, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and macrophages
include gelatinase (gelatin), stromelysins, and lysosomal hydrolases (fibronectin, proteoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans).
In general, the superficial dermis contains fine, loosely arranged collagen fibers that

38 • Structure and Function of the Skin
are irregularly distributed and a network of fine elastin fibers. The deep dermis contains
thick, densely arranged collagen fibers that tend to parallel the skin surface and elastin
fibers that are thicker and less numerous than those in the superficial dermis. In the
superficial dermis, elastic fibers, known as elaunin fibers, are organized in an arcade-like
arrangement." From these fibers, still thinner elastic fibers, called oxytalan fibers, ascend
almost vertically to terminate at the dermoepidermal junction and anchor to the basement
membrane. Elaunin and oxytalan fibers are composed of microfibrils/elastin and microfibrils, respectively. ISO Elastases are proteolytic enzymes capable of degrading elastic fibers,
and a variety of tissues and cells (including fibroblasts) are capable of producing elastolytic
enzymes. The elastases (serine proteinases) that are present in neutrophils and eosinophils
are the most potent, and they readily degrade elastic fibers in disease states.
Multiple subsets of dendritic cells are present within the dermis. 73 , 138 These dermal
dendrocytes are mostly bone marrow derived; express CD45, MHC class II, various
adhesion molecules (LFA-l, ICAM-l); and are antigen-presenting cells. They are phagocytic, variably factor XIlla- and CD34-positive, and show immunophenotypic variation
depending on their location (subepidermal, perivascular, periadnexal, superficial versus
deep dermal, and so forth). In dogs, dermal dendrocytes are COl, factor Xllla, MHC
class II, and Thy-l positive.P"

DERMAL GROUND SUBSTANCE
The ground (interstitial) substance is a viscoelastic gel-sol of fibroblast origin composed of
glycosaminoglycans (formerly called mucopolysaccharides) that are usually linked in vivo to
proteins (proteoglycans). These substances play vital roles in the epidermis, basement
membrane, dermis, and hair follicle development and cychng.23 • 65, ISO The major proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans include hyaluronate and heparin sulfate in the epidermis
(synthesized by keratinocytes), heparin sulfate and chondroitin-6-sulfate in the basement
membrane; and hyaluronic acid, dermatan sulfate, chondroitin-6-sulfate, chondroitin-4sulfate, versican, syndecan, decorin, glypican, and serglycin in the dermis.
The ground substance fills the spaces and surrounds other structures of the dermis
but allows electrolytes, nutrients, and cells to traverse it in passing from the dermal
vessels to the avascular epidermis. The proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans are extracellular and membrane-associated macromolecules that function in water storage and homeostasis; in the selective screening of substances; in the support of dermal structure (resist
compression); in lubrication; and in collagen fibrillogenesis, orientation, growth, and differentiation. Although glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans account for only about 0.1% of
the dry weight of skin, they can bind over 100 times their own weight in water.
Fibronectins are widespread extracellular matrix and body fluid glycoproteins capable
of multiple interactions with cell surfaces and other matrix components.v- 43 They are
produced by many cells, including keratinocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and histiocytes. The fibronectins moderate cell-to-cell interaction and cell adhesion to the substrate,
and they modulate microvascular integrity, vascular permeability, basement membrane
assembly, and wound healing. Fibronectin has been implicated in a variety of cell functions, including cell adhesion and morphology, opsonization, cytoskeletal organization,
oncogenic transformation, cell migration, phagocytosis, hemostasis, and embryonic differentiation. Fibronectins are present in the dermis, especially perivascularly and perineurally, and within the lamina lucida and lamina densa of the basement membrane.
Tenascin is a large glycoprotein that is prominently expressed at epithelial-mesenchymal interfaces.l'" It plays a Significant role in epithelial morphogenesis and proliferation
and wound healing.
Small amounts of mucin (a blue-staining, granular- to stringy-appearing substance with
H & E stain) are often seen in normal feline and canine skin, especially around appendages and blood vessels (see Fig. l-3C). In the Chinese Shar pei, however, large amounts
of mucin are normally found throughout the dermis, which could be confused with
pathologic mucinosis (myxedema) in other breeds and species.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 39

DERMAL CELLULAR ELEMENTS
The dermis is usually sparsely populated with cells.65, 77. 138, 170, 172.202 Fibroblasts (see Fig.
1-21) and dermal dendrocytes are present throughout. Dermal dendrocytes are predominantly perivascular antigen-presenting cells. In dogs, they are CDl, CDll, CDI8, CD45,
ICAM-l, and MHC class II positive. 1 They are also CD4 and CD90 (Thy-I) positive,
which distinguishes them from Langerhans' cells. Melanocytes may be seen near superficial dermal blood vessels, especially in dark-skinned dogs. They may also be seen around
the hair bulbs in darkly colored dogs, especially Doberman pinschers and black Labrador
retrievers.
Mast cells (Fig. 1-22) are most abundant around superficial dermal blood vessels and
appendages. In dogs and cats, many mast cells are easily recognized with routine H & E
stain. The method of fixation greatly influences the number of mast cells seen, with
routine formalin fixation resulting in 33% less mast cells stained as compared to Carney's
or Mota's solutions. 18., 57., 203. In cats, the cells have a fried-egg appearance, with the
lightly stained intracytoplasmic granules giving the cytoplasm a stippled appearance. In
both species, the mast cells are more easily recognized with special stains such as toluidine blue and acid orcein- Giemsa. In general, normal cat skin contains 4 to 20 mast cells
per high-power microscopic field around superficial dermal blood vessels; normal dog skin
contains 4 to 12 cells per high-power microscopic field.172, 180,207 In both the dog47b and
cat,57. mast cell numbers may be higher in skin from the pinna. The number of canine
cutaneous mast cells yielded per gram of skin was about 2.3 X 105, and the total
histamine content per cell was about 4.9 pg.47b In frozen fixed skin from normal cats and
dogs, special stains revealed about 60 to 81 mast cells/mm-," and 200 mast cells/rum",
respectively.203. Toluidine blue stain detected Significantly fewer mast cells than stains for
tryptase or chymase. Three mast cell subtypes are distinguished in normal canine skin
based on their content of mast cell-specific proteases: those that contain tryptase (T-mast
cells), those that contain chymase (C-mast cells), and those that contain both (TC-mast
cells).102., 203.
Other cells that are occasionally seen in very small numbers in normal feline and
canine skin include neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells. In
dogs, lymphocytes in normal skin are T cells (CD3+) and more commonly a1f3 receptor
positive than y/8 receptor positive."

Hair Follicles
Hair follicle morphogenesis is a complex process that occurs during the development of
the skin, as part of the hair cycle, when skin repairs superficial wounds, and in response
to certain pharmacologic agents. 4 , 50, 65, 79 It is a complex, multistage process in which the
epithelial cells of the hair follicle and the associated mesenchymal cells undergo a number
of collaborative interactions. At each stage, the participating cells have different phenotypic properties and produce different products.
The hair shaft is divided into medulla, cortex, and cuticle (Fig. 1-23)." The medulla,
the innermost region of the hair, is composed of longitudinal rows of cuboidal cells, or
cells flattened from top to bottom. The cells are solid near the hair root, but the rest of
the hair shaft contains air and glycogen vacuoles. The cortex, the middle layer, consists of
completely cornified, spindle-shaped cells, whose long axis is parallel to the hair shaft.
These cells contain the pigment that gives the hair its color. Pigment may also be present
in the medulla, but there it has little influence on the color of the hair shaft. In general,
the cortex accounts for one-sixth to one-third of the width of the hair shaft, and it
contributes the most to the mechanical properties of hair fibers. The cuticle, the outermost layer of the hair, is formed by flat, cornified, anuclear cells arranged like slate on a
roof, with the free edge of each cell facing the tip of the hair. Secondary ("down") hairs

"See references 4, 51, 65, 167, 170, 172, and 177,

40 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-22. Mast cells. A, Cat
dermal mast cells are often clustered
near blood vessels (arrowhead). They
have a "fried egg" appearance and
their cytoplasmic granules are indistinct in H & E stained skin. B, Dog
dermal mast cells are also found in
association with blood vessels (arrowhead), usually not in clusters, and
their cytoplasmic granules are so
deeply stained as to often obscure
the nucleus.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 41

FIGURE 1-23. Layers of hair shaft. A, White hair from normal cat. One layered outer cuticle has a serrated or
shingle-like apearance. The middle cortex layer is thicker and white. The inner medulla layer is dark and thick. B,
Section of hair shaft (arrow) within hair follicle of normal dog as seen in H & E stained tissue.

have a narrower medulla and a more prominent cuticle than do primary hairs, and lanugo
hairs have no medulla. In the cat, the profile of the hair shaft is distinctly serrated.
Computer-assisted evaluation of cuticular patterns as seen with scanning electron microscopy has suggested that such methodology may be useful for differentiating between
mammalian species.P" The epicuticle is an amorphous external layer derived from cuticular cells, as an exocellular secretion, or from the outer portion of cuticular cell membranes.'"?
Hair follicles are usually positioned at a 30- to 60-degree angle to the skin surface.
Cats and dogs have a compound hair follicle arrangement (Fig. 1-24). In general, a
cluster consists of two to five large primary hairs surrounded by groups of smaller,
secondary hairs. One of the primary hairs is the largest (central primary hair), and the
remaining primary hairs are smaller (lateral primary hairs). Each primary hair has sebaceous and sweat glands and an arrector pili muscle (Fig. 1-25). Secondary (down) hairs
may be accompanied only by sebaceous glands. The primary hairs generally emerge
independently through separate pores; the secondary hairs emerge through a common
pore. From five to 20 secondary hairs may accompany each primary hair. Hairs are
present in groups of 100 to 600/cm2 in the dog, with two to 15 hairs per group.180 In cats,
there are 800 to 1600 groups/cm 2, with 10 to 20 hairs per group.172, 180
The hair follicle has five major components: the dermal hair papilla, the hair matrix,
the hair itself, the inner root sheath, and the outer root sheath. The pluripotential cells of
the hair matrix give rise to the hair and the inner root sheath. The outer root sheath
represents a downward extension of the epidermis. Large hair follicles produce large hairs.
For descriptive purposes, the anagen hair follicle is divided into these three anatomic
segments (see Fig. 1-25): (1) the infundibulum, or pilosebaceous region (the upper
portion, which consists of the segment from the entrance of the sebaceous duct [where
trichilemmal keratinization begins] to the skin surface); (2) the isthmus (the middle
portion, which consists of the segment between the entrance of the sebaceous duct and
the attachment of the arrector pili muscle [where the trichohyalin granule-containing
cellular portion of the inner root sheath begins]); and (3) the inferior segment (the lowest
portion, which extends from the attachment of the arrector pili muscle to the dermal hair
papilla). The infundibulum and isthmus constitute the permanent portion of the hair
follicle, whereas the inferior segment is transitory. Dogs have no anatomic structure
analogous to the human hair follicular bulge (attachment site of arrector pili muscle).
Studies in the dog suggest that stem cells are distributed throughout the follicular infundibulum and isthmus, rather than being concentrated in the bulge area as they are
thought to be in humans.v'

42 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-24. A, Three multiple
hair follicle units (high power). B, Three
apopilosebaceous complexes, each showing primary and secondary hairs, sebaceous and epitrichial glands, and arrector pili muscles (high power).

The inner root sheath (Fig. 1-26) is composed of three concentric layers (see Fig. 126); from inside to outside these layers include (1) the inner root sheath cuticle (a
flattened, Single layer of overlapping cells that point toward the hair bulb and interlock
with the cells of the hair cuticle), (2) the Huxley layer (one to three nucleated cells thick),
and (3) the Henle layer (a Single layer of non-nucleated cells). These layers contain
eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules called trichohyalin granules (see Fig. I-If). Trichohyalin is a major protein component of these granules, which are morphologic hallmarks of
the inner root sheath and medullary cells of the hair follicle. Trichohyalin functions as a
keratin-associated protein that promotes the lateral alignment and aggregation of parallel
bundles of intermediate filaments in inner root sheath cells.65 • 144 The expression of
trichohyalin is not unique to the hair follicle; it is found to occur normally in a number of
other epithelial tissues, where it is closely associated with the expression of filaggrin, the
major keratohyalin granule protein. The inner root sheath keratinizes and disintegrates
when it reaches the level of the isthmus of the hair follicle. The prime function of the
inner root sheath is to mold the hair within it, which it accomplishes by hardening in

Structure and Function of the Skin • 43

FIGURE 1-25. Anatomy of hair follicle. Dog.
The infundibulum (upper arrow) goes from the
skin surface to the entry of the sebaceous gland
duct. The isthmus (middle arrow) goes from the
sebaceous gland duct to the attachment of the arrector pili muscle. The inferior segment (lower arrow) goes from the attachment of the arrector pili
muscle to the bulb.

advance of the hair. The amino acid citrulline occurs in high concentrations in hair and
trichohyalin granules; it has been used as a marker for hair follicle differentiation. The
telogen hair follicle contains no inner root sheath nor inferior segment.
The outer root sheath (see Fig. 1-26) is thickest near the epidermis and gradually
decreases in thickness toward the hair bulb. In its lower portion (from the isthmus of the
hair follicle downward), the outer root sheath is covered by the inner root sheath. It does
not undergo keratinization, and its cells have a clear, vacuolated cytoplasm (glycogen). In
the middle portion of the hair follicle (isthmus), the outer root sheath is no longer
covered by the inner root sheath, and it does undergo trichilemmal keratinization (keratohyalin granules are not formed) (see Fig. 1-lg). In the upper portion of the hair follicle
(infundibulum), the outer root sheath undergoes keratinization in the same fashion as
occurs in the surface epidermis. The innermost cell layer of the outer root sheath is a
special single-cell layer, located just outside of Henle's layer, whose pattern of cell differentiation and keratinization is ultrastructurally and immunohistochemically different from
that of the main layer of the outer root sheath.l'" The cells are distinctly flattened and
lack lamellar bodies.
The outer root sheath is surrounded by two other prominent structures: a basement
membrane zone, or glassy membrane (a downward reflection of the epidermal basement
membrane zone), and a fibrous root sheath (a layer of dense connective tissue). Perifollicular mineralization of the basement membrane zone has been described in healthy toy
poodles and Bedlington terriers. 180, 182 This may also occur as a senile change in other

44 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-26. Hair follicle and hair shaft layers. Dog. Vacuolated (glycogen) outer root sheath
(long black arrow). Inner root sheath (short black
arrow). Cortex of hair shaft (small white triangle).
Central medulla of hair shaft (large white triangle).

breeds of dogs and must be differentiated from the perifollicular mineralization seen in
dogs with naturally occurring or iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome.
The dermal hair papilla is continuous with the dermal connective tissue and is
covered by a thin continuation of the basement membrane. The inner root sheath and
hair grow from a layer of plump, nucleated epithelial cells that cover the papilla. These
cells regularly show mitosis and are called the hair matrix. The importance of the papilla
in the embryogenesis and subsequent cycling of hair follicles is well known. 4. 42, 65 Additionally, the morphology of the dermal papilla changes throughout the hair growth cycle,
being maximal in volume in mature anagen and minimal at telogen. This is mostly a result
of changes in the amount of extracellular matrix within the papilla. In the anagen hair
follicle, dermal papilla volume is proportional to the volume of the hair. Just below the
dermal papilla is a fibroelastic cushion (Aaro-Perkins corpuscle).
The hair follicles of animals with straight hair are straight, and those of animals with
curly hair tend to be spiral in configuration. Follicular folds have been described in the
hair follicles of animals. These structures represent multiple (1 to 23) corrugations of the
inner root sheath, which project into the pilar canal immediately below the sebaceous
duct opening. These folds are believed to be artifacts of fixation and processing because
they are not seen in unprocessed sections cut by hand. 172· 177
Two specialized types of tactile hairs are found in mammalian skin: sinus hairs and
tylotrich hairs.65 . 172, 177, 180 Sinus hairs (vibrissae, whiskers) are found on the muzzle, lip,
eyelid, face, and throat, and on the palmar aspect of the carpus of cats (pili carpalis,
carpal gland). These hairs are thick, stiff, and tapered distally. Sinus hairs are characterized by an endothelium-lined blood sinus interposed between the external root sheath of
the follicle and an outer connective tissue capsule (Fig. 1- 27). The sinus is divided into a
superior, nontrabecular ring (or annular) sinus and an inferior, cavernous (or trabecular)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 4S

FIGURE 1-27. A, Hair follicle of sinus hair of cat in longitudinal section, semidiagrammatic (X 150):
a hair; b, epidermis; c, outer; d, inner layer of the dermal follicle; e, the blood sinus (this sinus has been
differentiated into a nontrabecular annular sinus f, into which projects the sinus pad g); h, hair papilla; i,
glassy membrane of the follicle; k, outer root sheath; I, inner root sheath; m, sebaceous glands. B, Tactile
hair from upper lip of dog showing blood sinus (high power). (A, from Trautmann A, Fiebiger J:
Fundamentals of the Histology of Domestic Animals. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1952, P 342.)

sinus, A cushion-like thickening of mesenchyme (sinus pad) projects into the annular
sinus. The cavernous sinuses are traversed by trabeculae containing many nerve fibers.
Skeletal muscle fibers attach to the outer layer of the follicle. Pacinian corpuscles are
situated close to the sinus hair follicles. Sinus hairs are thought to function as slowadapting mechanoreceptors.
Tylotrich hairs are scattered among ordinary body hairs. The hair follicles are larger
than surrounding follicles and contain a single stout hair and an annular complex of
neurovascular tissue that surrounds the follicle at the level of the sebaceous glands.
Tylotrich hairs are thought to function as rapid-adapting mechanoreceptors. Each tylotrich
follicle is associated with a tylotrich pad (haarscheiben, touch corpuscle, touch dome, hair
disk, tactile hair disk, tactile pad, hederiform ending, or Pinkus corpuscle, Iggo dome,
Iggo-Pinkus dome, or Eimer's organ) (see Figs. 1-10 and 1-28). Tylotrich pads are

FIGURE 1-28. Tylotrich pad in
cat skin. Merkel's cells (arrow) at
basement membrane zone.

46 • Structure and Function of the Skin
composed of a thickened and distinctive epidermis underlaid by a convex area of fine
connective tissue that is highly vascularized and well innervated. Unmyelinated nerve
fibers end as flat plaques in association with Merkel's cells, which serve as slow-adapting
touch receptors.
The histologic appearance of hair follicles varies with the stage of the hair follicle
cycle." 51, 65 The anagen hair follicle is characterized by a well-developed, spindle-shaped
dermal papilla, which is capped by the hair matrix (the ball-and-claw appearance) to form
the hair follicle bulb (Fig. 1-29), Hair matrix cells are often heavily melanized and show
mitotic activity. The anagen hair follicle extends into the deep dermis and often into the
subcutis. Anagen has been divided into six stages: Stages I through IV, referred to as
proanagen (differentiation); Stage V, referred to as mesanagen (transition to rapid growth);
and Stage VI, referred to as metanagen (posteruptive hair elongation)." J77

FIGURE 1-29. Anagen hair follicle. Longitudinal section of a secondary hair follicle at anagen stage,
from the saddle region of a 28month-old beagle. The bulb (Bb)
extends into the subcutaneous fat
(SF). The spindle-shaped dermal
papilla (DP) extends toward the
medulla of the hair (Mu), the base
of the dermal papilla is continuous
with the connective tissue (CT) of
the hair follicle. The dermal papilla
is surrounded by the matrix cells
(Mx) of the bulb (Bb). The basal
cells of the matrix are columnar
(BC). The lower part of the bulb
contains undifferentiated matrix
cells (VC) (X350, H & E). (From
Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW,
Lovell JE: Histology of the hair cycle in male beagle dogs. Am J Vet
Res 40:1734,1979.)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 47

FIGURE 1-30. Catagen. Longitudinal section of a hair follicle at catagen stage from the
saddle region of a 2-week-old beagle. The dermal papilla (DP) is oval in shape. The nuclei are
crowded and the matrix cells (Mx) that border the dermal papilla have lost their orientation. The
glassy membrane (GM) is thick and straight at the upper part of the hair follicle (single black
unlabeled arrow in the upper part of the picture), while above the bulb, the glassy membrane is
undulating (two black unlabeled arrows in the lower part of the picture) (X395, H & E). (From
Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW, Lovell JE: Histology of the hair cycle in male beagle dogs. Am
J Vet Res 40:1734, 1979.)

48 • Structure and Function of the Skin
The catagen hair follicle is characterized by retraction toward the surface; a thickened, irregular, undulating basement membrane zone; an increased number of apoptotic
keratinocytes; a thickened basement membrane zone between the hair matrix and the
dermal papilla; a smaller bulb; and an ovoid or round dermal papilla (Fig. 1-30). The
catagen follicle epithelium is shortened in length and reduced in volume -lost from the
position of the hair bulb to just below the entry of the sebaceous duct-the volume
reduction accomplished largely by the process of apoptosis. The TGF -{3 pathway is involved in the induction of catagen, and caspases play essential roles in the execution of
apoptosis.P" The best morphologic feature of the catagen hair follicle may be the partial
replacement of the inner root sheath by trichilemmal keratinization. 50 Melanogenesis
ceases, the proximal hair shaft is depigmented, and mitotic activity stops. As the follicular
epithelium is lost, the adventitial collagen and neurovascular network of the follicle condenses along the tract of the pre-existing anagen follicle. This specialized adventitial
structure, the follicular stile, is probably required to direct precisely the downward growth
of the new follicular epithelium as the follicle reenters anagen.
The telogen hair follicle is reduced to about one third of its former length and is
characterized by the small dermal papilla that is separated from the matrix cells, no hair
bulb, the lack of melanin and mitotic activity, and the absence of the inner root sheath
and the presence of club (brushlike) hair (Figs. 1-31 and 1-32).
Hair follicles show four morphological patterns of keratinizationv 50: (1) infundibular
(like epidermis, with basketweave orthokeratosis and keratohyalin granules), (2) trichilemmal (a serrated, more closely packed, eosinophilic keratin with scant or no keratohyalin
granules), (3) hair matrix or trichogenic (as cortex of hair shaft, characterized by retention
of nuclear outlines [ghost cellsj), (4) inner root sheath and hair shaft medullary (compact
and opaque keratin with blue-gray to eosinophilic color and red trichohyalin granules, as
in Henle's and Huxley's layers).
A hair plucked in anagen shows a larger expanded root that is moist and glistening,
often pigmented, and square at the end (see Chap. 2). A hair plucked in telogen shows a
tapered club root, with little or no pigment.
Langerhan's cells are present in the hair follicle outer root sheath and have been
shown to migrate to the epidermis within 72 hours followlng ultraviolet radiation.F' Thus,
the hair follicle is a specialized immunologic compartment of the skin that serves as a
reservoir to repopulate the epidermis. This follicular reservoir paradigm is also seen
following thermal injury and in vitiligo, in which follicular keratinocytes and melanocytes
replenish epidermal cell populations.

Sebaceous Glands
Sebaceous (holocrine) glands are simple or branched alveolar glands distributed throughout all haired skin.55 • 94.141.170.172,180 The glands usually open through a duct into the pilary
canal in the infundibulum (pilosebaceous follicle). Sebaceous glands are largest and most
numerous near mucocutaneous junctions, in the interdigital spaces, on the dorsal neck and
rump, on the chin (submental organ), and on the dorsal tail (tail gland, supracaudal organ,
preen gland). The submental organ (chin gland) also contains large nerve fibers, so it may
serve tactile and scent-marking functions.V" Sebaceous glands are not found in the footpads and nasal planum.
Sebaceous lobules are bordered by a basement membrane zone, on which there sits a
single layer of deeply basophilic basal cells (called reserve cells) (Fig. 1-33). These cells
become progressively more lipidized and eventually disintegrate to form sebum toward the
center of the lobule. Sebaceous ducts are lined with squamous epithelium.
The oily secretion (sebum) produced by the sebaceous glands tends to keep the skin
soft and pliable by forming a surface emulsion that spreads over the surface of the
stratum corneum to retain moisture and thus maintain proper hydration. The oil film also
spreads over the hair shafts and gives them a glossy sheen. During periods of illness or
malnutrition, the haircoat may become dull and dry as a result of inadequate sebaceous
gland function. In addition to its action as a physical barrier, the sebum-sweat emulsion
forms a chemical barrier against potential pathogens (see Cutaneous Ecology in this

Structure and Function of the Skin • 49

FIGURE 1-31. Telogen. Longitudinal section of a main hair follicle at telogen stage from
the saddle region of a 3-month-old beagle. The dermal papilla (DP) is separated from the
matrix cells of the hair follicle. It is surrounded by fibrous connective tissue (FCT) and appears
to contact the base of the follicle at one point. The hair germ cells (HG) are located at the
base of the club hair (CH). The cells of the outer root sheath (ORS) lack glycogen granules.
The glassy membrane (GM) is thick and PAS positive. The hair follicle at this stage is
surrounded by connective tissue that separates the follicle from the adipose tissue (X 400).
(From Al-Bagdadi FK, Titkemeyer CW, Lovell, JE: Histology of the hair cycle in male beagle
dogs. Am J Vet Res 40:1734, 1979.)

50 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-32. Club hair of telogen. Longitudinal section of a main hair follicle at telogen stage from the
saddle region of a 24-month-old beagle. The club hair (CH) has many keratinized fibers (KF) that extend
between the cells of the outer root sheath (DRS). These keratinized fibers give the club hair a brushlike
appearance (x 465, H & E). (From Al-Bagdad! FK, Titkemeyer CW, Lovell JE: Histology of the hair cycle in
male beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 40:1734, 1979.)

FIGURE

1-33. Canine seba-

ceous gland lobules.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 5 I

chapter). Freshly liberated sebum contains predominantly triglycerides and wax esters." In
the hair follicle infundibulum, sebum becomes contaminated with lipase-producing bacteria (Propionibacterium spp., Staphylococcus spp.), which results in the production of fatty
acids. Many of sebum's fatty acid constituents (linoleic, myristic, oleic, and palmitic acids)
are known to have antimicrobial actions. Sebum may also have pheromonal properties.P'
Sebaceous glands have an abundant blood supply and appear to be innervated. Their
secretion is thought to be under hormonal control, with androgens causing hypertrophy
and hyperplasia, and estrogens and glucocorticoids causing involution. The skin surface
lipids of cats and dogs have been studied in some detail and are different from those of
humans (see Horny Layer in this chapter). Enzyme histochemical studies have indicated
that all mammalian sebaceous glands contain succinate acid dehydrogenase, cytochrome
oxidase, and a few esterases.l'"

Sweat Glands
Because of investigations into the physiology and ultrastructural aspects of sweat production by sweat glands, it has been suggested that the apocrine and eccrine sweat glands
are more accurately called the epitrichial and atrichial sweat glands, respectively." We
have adopted the suggested terminology for this book.

EPITRICHIAL SWEAT GLANDS
Epitrichial sweat glands are generally coiled and saccular or tubular and are distributed
throughout all haired skin." They are not present in footpads or nasal planum. These
glands are located below the sebaceous glands, and they usually open through a duct into
the pilary canal in the infundibulum, above the sebaceous duct opening. Epitrichial sweat
glands tend to be larger in areas where hair follicle density is lower. They are largest and
most numerous near mucocutaneous junctions, in interdigital spaces, and over the dorsal
neck and rump. The secretory portions of epitrichial sweat glands consist of a single row
of flattened to columnar epithelial (secretory) cells and a single layer of fusiform myoepithelial cells (Figs. 1-34 and 1-35). The epitrichial sweat gland excretory duct is lined by
two cuboidal to flattened epithelial cell layers and a luminal cuticle but no myoepithelial
cells." In general, epitrichial sweat glands do not appear to be innervated. Epitrichial
sweat probably has pheromonal and antimicrobial properties (IgA contentj.?'

·See references 65, 93, 94, 141, 170, 172, 180, and 188.

FIGURE 1-34. Section through coiled
portion of epitrichial sweat gland (high
power),

52 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE

1-35.

showing
power).

secretory

Epitrtchial
epithelium

gland
(high

Enzyme histochemical studies have demonstrated alkaline phosphatase and acid phosphatase in epitrichial sweat gland secretory epithelium.t" 120, 135 Immunohistochemical
studies show that the acini and ducts of canine epitrichial sweat glands are positive for
cytokeratin; associated myoepithelial cells are positive for both cytokeratin and S-100
protein.f
Recent studies in swine have shown that the sweat gland apparatus is capable of reepithelializing the skin surface, although the resulting epidermis is not entirely normal.P'

ATRICHIAL SWEAT GLANDS
Atrichial (merocrine) sweat glands are found only in the footpads. 172, 180. 188, 202 These
glands are small and tightly coiled, and they are located in the deep dermis and subcutis
of the footpads. Secretory coils consist of a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelial
cells and a single layer of fusiform myoepithelial cells (Fig. 1-36). The intradermal

FIGURE 1-36. Atrichia! sweat glands
from canine footpad (high power).

Structure and Function of the Skin • S3
portion of the excretory duct consists of a double row of cuboidal epithelial cells. The
excretory duct opens directly to the footpad surface.
Enzyme histochemical studies have demonstrated cytochrome oxidase, succinate and
other dehydrogenases, phosphorylases, and alkaline phosphatase in atrichia] sweat
glands. 135 They are richly supplied with cholinesterase-positive nerves.135. 172.180,211

SWEATING AND THERMOREGULATION
The skin of cats and dogs does not possess the extensive superficial arteriovenous shunts
of humans and swine that are designed to disseminate heat in hot weather. Carnivores
also lack atrichial sweat glands in the hairy skin.
The frequency of sweating and the circumstances under which sweating occurs in cats
and dogs are unclear. Some authors have stated that the dog shows great variation in the
degree of epitrichial sweating that takes place and that some breeds (especially German
shepherds, Labrador retrievers, and other large breeds) may show visible sweating in the
axillae, groin, and ventral abdomen.P? Other authors have noted that epitrichial sweating
is occasionally seen in certain febrile and excited dogS. 141 Still others have reported the
absence of epitrichial sweating in dogs subjected to severe generalized temperature stress
and in dogs that were struggling violently." Atrichial sweating may be seen on the
footpads of excited or agitated cats and dogs. 18o
In dogs, localized epitrichial sweating can be produced by local heat applications and
by the intradermal injection of various sympathomimetic (epinephrine, norepinephrine)
and parasympathomimetic (acetylcholine, pilocarpine) drugs." 7, 40, 86,141 Because responses
to all of these can be blocked by atropine, the final physiologic stimulus appears to be
cholinergic, It has also been reported that asphyxiation or the intravenous injection of
epinephrine or norepinephrine has produced generalized epitrichial sweating in dogs. 86
Because these responses could not be blocked by adrenal medullectomy but were blocked
by sympathetic denervation of skin, it was concluded that canine epitrichial sweating is
primarily regulated by neural mechanisms and that humoral mechanisms play a subsidiary
role. One group of researchers concluded-on the basis of available local and systemic
pharmacologic data, local and generalized thermal responses, hypothalamic stimulation,
and electron microscopic examinations-that canine epitrichial sweat glands were not
directly innervated and had little, if any, thermoregulatory importance.w 41 It was also
suggested that because the only physiologic stimulus noted to produce epitrichial sweating
consistently in dogs was copulation, epitrichial sweating in dogs served a predominantly
pheromonal tunotion.v
Atrichial sweating from the footpads of cats and dogs can be provoked by cholinergic
stimuli and, less so, by adrenergic stimuli. 172. 180. 194 Atropine blocks glandular responses to
these agents. Feline atrichial sweat contains lactate, glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride,
and bicarbonate, and it differs from that of humans in that it is hypertonic and alkaline
and contains much higher concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride.s" 58,188
Mechanisms to Conserve Heat
When the environmental temperature falls, the body attempts to reduce heat loss by
vasoconstriction in the skin and erection of the hairs to improve the insulating qualities of
the skin and coat. The external temperature at which the heat-retaining mechanisms are
no longer able to maintain a constant body temperature and at which heat production has
to be increased is known as the critical temperature. Normal dogs with intact pelage have
a critical temperature of 14°C (57°F); when their coats are shaved off, however, they have
a critical temperature of 25°C (77°F).180 Thick subcutaneous fat also acts as efficient
insulating material. Nonfasting animals have a lower critical temperature than fasting
individuals; therefore, the former are better able to tolerate a low environmental temperature. When the aforementioned mechanisms of heat conservation are no longer effective
in preventing a fall in body temperature, an increase in heat production begins. A rapid

S4 • Structure and Function of the Skin
increase in heat production is accomplished mainly by shivering. In normal dogs, shivering
begins when the rectal temperature falls 1°C.
Mechanisms to Dissipate Heat

Heat is regularly lost from the body by radiation, conduction, and convection; vaporization
of water from the skin and respiratory passages; and excretion of urine and feces. The
excretory losses are relatively unimportant in heat dissipation. Ordinarily, 75% of the heat
loss is attributable to radiation, conduction, and convection. The efficiency of these mechanisms varies with the external temperature and humidity, and it is modified further by
the animal's vasomotor and pilomotor responses. These responses become ineffective at
higher temperatures, when heat loss by vaporization of water from the skin and lungs
becomes more influential. Because they do not produce an abundance of atrichial sweat,
dogs and cats have developed the ability to vaporize large volumes of water from their
respiratory passages. In dogs, as the environmental temperature rises above 27° to 29°C
(81° to 84°F), the rate of breathing also rises, but the depth of breathing (tidal volume) is
markedly reduced. This helps prevent excess carbon dioxide blowoff and severe blood gas
changes. At a rectal temperature of 40.5°C (105°F), the dog is in danger of thermal
imbalance; at 43°C, collapse is imminent.
The rectal temperature of the cat begins to rise at an environmental temperature of
32°C (90°F), but as the respiratory rate increases, the tidal volume is only slightly reduced. As a result, the cat is more susceptible to a lowering of its blood CO 2 level (i.e., to
respiratory alkalosis). The cat possesses an additional compensatory mechanism; a hot
environment, or sympathetic stimulation, produces a copious flow of watery saliva from
the submaxillary gland. The cat spreads this on its coat for additional water vaporization,
and cooling results. Similar stimulation in dogs produces only a scanty secretion of thick
saliva that cannot help the cooling process.P?
The problem of temperature regulation in dogs and cats is often complicated by the
physical condition of the coat and by the environmental temperature. Breeds with heavy
coats intended for cold climates sometimes suffer when they are moved to regions of high
temperatures. The problem is greatly accentuated by a matted, unkempt coat that stifles
air circulation through the hair. Proper grooming greatly increases the comfort of these
animals.
Specialized Glands
Specialized glands include the circumanal (perianal) glands, the glands of the external
auditory canal (see Chap. 19), and the anal sacs (see Chap. 19), as well as the tail gland.
The circumanal (perianal) glands are present at birth and develop from ducts that
originate from the inner and outer perianal sides of the external root sheath of hair
follicles.F: 121 These glands are also found in the skin of the prepuce and dorsal and
ventral aspects of the tail. These glands are positive for cytokeratin.P'' 200
The tail gland (supracaudal gland, preen gland) of the dog is an oval-shaped area
located on the dorsal surface of the tail over the fifth to seventh coccygeal vertebrae,
about 5 em distal to the anus.U"- 180 This gland is consistently present in wild Canidae; it is
regarded as an atavism in dogs, however, because it is somewhat different in structure, is
lacking in function, and is clearly visible in only about 5% of all normal male dogs. The
gland is present histologically in most dogs. The haircoat of the region is characterized by
stiff, coarse hairs, each of which emerges Singly from its follicle. The surface of the skin
may be yellow and waxy from the abundant secretion of the numerous large glands in the
area. This secretion may aid in olfactory species recognition. This area of the tail may be
severely affected in seborrheic skin diseases and may also develop hyperplasia, cystic
degeneration, infection, adenoma, and adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the canine tail gland is composed predominantly of hepatoid cells,
which are identical to those in the hepatoid (perianal, circumanal) glands. The glandular

Structure and Function of the Skin • SS

ducts empty into hair follicles. The tail gland and the circumanal glands are dependent on
testosterone and form a topographic-ethnologic unit.
The tail gland (supracaudal organ) of the cat consists of numerous large sebaceous
glands that run the entire length of the dorsal surface of the tail. 172, 188 Excess accumulation of glandular secretion in this area is called stud tail.

Arrector Pili Muscles
Arrector pili muscles are of mesenchymal ongm and consist of smooth muscle with
intracellular and extracellular vacuoles.s" 172, 180, 188, 202 They are present in all haired skin
and are largest in the dorsal neck and rump. Arrector pili muscles originate in the
superficial dermis and insert approximately perpendicularly on the primary hair follicles
(see Figs. 1-25 and 1-37). Branching of these muscles is often seen in the superficial
dermis. Arrector pili muscles are about one fourth to one half the diameter of central
primary hair follicles in most haired skin areas but are of equal diameter in the dorsal
lumbar, dorsal sacral, and dorsal tail areas.
These muscles receive cholinergic innervation and contract in response to epinephrine
and norepinephrine, producing piloerection. Arrector pili muscles probably function in
thermoregulation and in the emptying of sebaceous glands.

FIGURE 1-37. Arrector pili. Dog. Arrector pili
muscle originates in superficial dermis (upper arrow) and inserts on the hair follicle (lower arrow).

S6 • Structure and Function of the Skin

Blood Vessels
The microcirculation of skin is a rather complex and dynamic system that is important for
skin metabolism and temperature regulation, and is an important part of the organ's
defense system against invaders. Cutaneous blood vessels are generally arranged in three
intercommunicating plexuses of arteries and veins (Figs. 1-38 and 1_39).65.166.172,180 The
deep plexus is found at the interface of the dermis and subcutis. Branches from this
plexus descend into the subcutis and ascend to supply the lower portions of the hair
follicles and the epitrichial sweat glands. These ascending vessels continue upward to feed
the middle plexus, which lies at the level of the sebaceous glands. The middle plexus gives
off branches to the arrector pili muscles, ascending and descending branches that supply
the middle portions of the hair follicles and the sebaceous glands, and ascending branches
to feed the superficial plexus. Capillary loops that are immediately below the epidermis
emanate from the superficial plexus and supply the epidermis and upper portion of the
hair follicles.
The microcirculatory bed is composed of three segments: arterioles, arterial and
venous capillaries, and venules.P Electron microscopy is necessary to identify these different segments of the microvasculature definttively.P The arterioles consist of endothelial
cells surrounded by two layers of smooth muscle cells, and most likely function as part of
the resistance vessels in skin. Arterial and venous capillaries lack surrounding smooth
muscle cells. The majority of superficial dermal vessels are postcapillary venules, which are
the most physiologically reactive segment of the microcirculation and are also the site
where inflammatory cells migrate from the vascular space into tissues and where endothelial cells develop gaps that result in increased vascular permeability during inflammation.
Blood vessel endothelial cells are mesenchymal in origin and characterized (1) ultrastructurally by a peripheral basement membrane and intracytoplasmic Weibel-Palade bodies (rod-shaped tubular structures enveloped in a continuous Single membrane); (2) by
their possession of factor VIII (von Willebrand) antigen, plasminogen activators, and
prostaglandins; (3) by CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule [PECAM]); and
(4) by being phagocytic." 65,180 Endothelial cells are strategically located between intravascular and tissue compartments, and serve as key regulators of leukocyte trafficking. 54
Selectins (E- and P-selectin) and members of the immunoglobulin superfamily (ICAM-l,
vascular cell adhesion molecule-I [VCAM-l]) are upregulated on endothelial cells on
inflammatory stimulation and mediate rolling, adhesion, and transmigration of leukocytes
from the blood stream. Angiogenesis (new vessel formation) is controlled, at least in part,
by mast cells (histamine), macrophages (tumor necrosis factor-a [TNF-a]), and TGF-j3.8, 97
Arteriovenous anastomoses are normal connections between arteries and veins that

FIGURE 1-38. Schematic section of skin of the dog, showing tylotrich pad (epidermal papilla,
haarscheiben) and blood vessels (veins in black). (Modified from Evans HE: Miller's Anatomy of the
Dog, 3rd ed. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, 1993.)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 57

FIGURE 1-39. Superficial dermal blood vessels. Dog. Occasional
mast cells and lymphocytes may be
seen (arrow).

allow arterial blood to enter the venous circulation without passing through capillary
beds. 51. 65. 180 Because of the size and position of these anastomoses, they can alter
circulation dynamics and the blood supply to tissues. They occur in all areas of the skin
but are most common over the extremities (especially the legs and ears). These anastomoses occur in all levels of the dermis but especially in the deep dermis.
Arteriovenous anastomoses show considerable variation in structure, ranging from
simple, slightly coiled vessels to such complex structures as the glomus, a special arteriovenous shunt located within the deep dermis. Each glomus consists of an arterial segment
and a venous segment (Fig. 1-40). The arterial segment (Sucquet-Hoyer canal) branches
from an arteriole. The wall shows a single layer of endothelium surrounded by a basement
membrane zone and a tunica media that is densely packed with four to six layers of
glomus cells. These cells are large and plump, have a clear cytoplasm, and resemble
epithelioid cells. Glomus cells are generally regarded as modified smooth muscle cells.
The venous segment is thinly walled and has a wide lumen.
Arteriovenous anastomoses are associated with thermoregulation. Constriction of the
shunt restricts and dilatation enhances the blood flow to an area. Acetylcholine and
histamine cause dilatation; epinephrine and norepinephrine cause constriction.
Pericytes, which vary from fusiform to clublike in appearance, are aligned parallel to
blood vessels on their dermal side. 22. 51, 65, 180 They are contractile cells, containing actinlike and myosin-like filaments, and they are important in regulating capillary flow. The
origin of pericytes is uncertain,
Veil cells are flat, adventitial, fibroblast-like cells that surround all dermal microvessels,22, 51, 65 Although their exact function and nature are undetermined, the fact that they
stain for factor XIlIa indicates that they are a component of the dermal dendrocyte
system. Unlike pericytes, which are an integral component of the vascular wall and are
enmeshed in the mural basement membrane material, veil cells are entirely external to
the wall. The veil cell demarcates the vessel from the surrounding dermis. Perivascular
mast cells are usually present in the space between the vascular wall and the surrounding
veil cells.22
Laser Doppler flowmetry is an excellent noninvasive technique for the measurement
of cutaneous microcirculation.53, 122 The technique can be applied to monitor inflammation
caused by various drugs, chemicals, and allergens related to blood flow. Through the

58 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-40. Glomus. (From Elder D, ed:
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th ed. Lippincott-Raven, 1998, Philadelphia.)

measurement of blood flow, the pathophysiology of various skin diseases can be verified
and certain treatments can be partially monitored.

Lymph Vessels
The skin is confronted by a specialized set of pathogenic organisms and environmental
chemicals that represent a distinctive spectrum of antigenic specificities. It has a unique
collection of lymphatics and lymphoid and dendritic cells to deal with these special
demands.
Lymphatics arise from capillary networks that lie in the superficial dermis and surround the adnexa.51, 65. 166 The vessels arising from these networks drain into a subcutaneous lymphatic plexus. Lymph vessels are not usually seen above the middle dermis in
routine histologic preparations of normal skin,
The lymphatics are essential for nutrition because they control the true microcirculation of the skin, the movement of interstitial tissue fluid.'?' The supply, permeation, and
removal of tissue fluid are important for proper function. The lymphatics are the drains
that take away the debris and excess matter that result from daily wear and tear in the
skin. They are essential channels for the return of protein and cells from the tissues to the
blood stream and for linking the skin and regional lymph nodes in an immunoregulatory
capacity, In skin, lymphatics carry material that has penetrated the epidermis and dermis,
such as solvents, topical medicaments, injected vaccines and drugs, and products of
inflammation.
Skin has a noncontractile initial lymphatic collector system that drains into contractile
collector lymphatics."! Initial lymphatics have an attenuated endothelial layer, discontinuous basement membrane, and noncontiguous cell junctions. Lymph formation depends on
the periodic expansion of the initial lymphatics, whereas compression leads to the emptying of the initial lymphatics into the contractile collector lymphatics, which have smooth
muscle, exhibit peristalsis, and carry lymph toward the lymph nodes. Expansion and
compression of collecting lymphatics is achieved by periodic tissue motions such as pressure, pulsations, arteriolar vasomotion, skin massage, and muscle motion. 145 • 161
In general, lymph vessels are distinguished from blood capillaries by (1) possessing
wider and more angular lumina, (2) having flatter and more attenuated endothelial cells,
(3) having no pericytes, and (4) containing no blood (Fig, 1-41). However, even the
slightest injury disrupts the wall of a lymphatic or blood vessel or the intervening connective tissue. Consequently, traumatic fistulae are commonplace, These account for the
common observation of blood flow in the lymphatics in inflamed skin.

Nerves
Cutaneous nerve fibers have sensory functions, control the vasomotor tonus, and regulate
the secretory activities of glands, They also exert a number of important effector func-

Structure and Function of the Skin • S9

FIGURE 1-41. Lymphatic vessels (arrow). Note angular outline and absence of
intravascular blood cells.

tions, including the modulation of multiple inflammatory, proliferative, and reparative
cutaneous processes.f 77. 147,201 Cutaneous nerves are in close contact with dermal vessels,
mast cells, fibroblasts, keratinocytes, and Langerhan's cells. Neuropeptides released by
cutaneous nerves can activate a number of target cells such as keratinocytes (inducing
release of cytokines such as IL-1), mast cells (producing potent proinflammatory cytokines
such as TNF-a), and endothelial cells (upregulating VCAM-1 expression and causing
secretion of IL-8). Such neuropeptides include substance P, neurokinin A, calcitonin
gene-related peptide, vasoactive intestinal peptide, neuropeptide Y, somatostatin, and
pituitary adenylate cyclase activity peptide. In addition, skin epithelium can generate
neurotrophins, thus influencing the development, sprouting, and survival of nerve fibers.
In general, cutaneous nerve fibers are associated with blood vessels (dual autonomic
innervation of arteries) (Fig. 1-42), various cutaneous end organs (tylotrich pad [see Figs.
1-10 and 1-43], Pacini's corpuscle [Fig. 1-44], Meissner's corpuscle), sebaceous glands,
hair follicles, and arrector pili muscles. The fibers occur as a subepidermal plexus (see
Fig. 1-43).65 Free nerve endings even penetrate the epidermis. The motor innervation of
skin is attributable to sympathetic fibers of the autonomic nervous system. Although they
are ordinarily considered somatic sensory nerves, the cutaneous nerve trunks carry myelinated postganglionic sympathetic fibers. Under the light microscope, small cutaneous
nerves and free nerve endings can be demonstrated satisfactorily only by methylene blue
staining, metallic impregnation, or histochemical techniques.
In addition to the important function of sensory perception (touch, heat, cold, pressure, pain, and itch), the dermal nerves promote the survival and proper functioning of
the epidermis (i.e., the so-called trophic influences).
The area of skin supplied by the branches of one spinal nerve is known as its
dermatome. Dermatomes have been mapped out for the cat14 , 104 and dog. 11, 12, 99, 204

OVERVIEW OF CUTANEOUS SENSATION
The skin is a major sensory surface. Signals about external events and about the internal
state of the skin are sent to the central nervous system by an array of receptor endings.
Therrrwreceptors fall into two categories: cold units, which are excited by falling skin
temperatures, and warm units, which are excited by rising skin temperatures.P" Cold units
have C axons and A axons. Cold unit nerve terminals are branches of a small myelinated

60 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-42. Dog skin. Large
nerve fiber (arrow) to the right of
a deep dermal arteriole.

FIGURE 1-43. Nerve supply of the canine skin. a, dermal nerve network; b, hair follicle network; c,
specialized end organs.

Structure and Function of the Skin • 6 I

FIGURE 1-44. Cat skin. Two
Pacini's corpuscles. Note typical
"onion skin" appearance.

axon, ending in a small invagination in the basal cells of the epidermis.P" 76.180 Warm units
also have C axons and A axons, but no morphologic nerve terminal has been identified.
Four types of sensitive mechanoreceptor units with A axons are present in most
skin regions. 65 Pacinian corpuscle units are extremely sensitive to small high-frequency
vibrations, deep pressure, and very rapid transients.s" 180 Rapidly adapting units, which
arise from Meissner (Wagner-Meissner corpuscle, Dogiel's end-bulb, or Ruffini's endbulb) or Ruffini corpuscles, are primarily sensitive to the velocity of skin movement and
touch. 65, 77, 180 In hairy skin, there are many afferent units that are excited by hair
movement and have both A {3 and A 8 axons. These axons provide the major tactile input
from such regions. Guard and down hairs receive many nerve terminations of the lanceolate type. Such units can be subdivided into two major classes: (1) those excited only by
movement of large guard or tylotrich hairs (G and T hair units), and (2) those excited by
movement of all hairs, but especially by the fine down hairs (D hair units).65, 180 The units
driven from large hairs nearly always have A {3 axons; those driven from down hairs have
A 8 axons. G and T hair units are activated by rapid hair movements, and D hair units
respond to slow movements. An additional class of units activated by static deflection of
hairs is associated with large sinus hairs such as vibrissae. 65,66 Finally, a characteristic class
of unit with an unmyelinated axon, the C mechanoreceptor, is frequently encountered in
cat haired skin. 65, 180 Slowly adapting Type I endings from Merkel's cell complexes signal
about steady pressure.s" 81, 180 Slowly adapting Type II units, which are associated with
Ruffini endings;30, 6.5 show directional sensitivity in response to skin stretch and may playa
proprioceptive role.
Most nociceptor units fall into two categories: A {) high-threshold mechanoreceptor
units with A {) axons, and polymodal nociceptor units with C axons." The latter afferents
are classic pain receptors, responding to intense mechanical and thermal stimuli and to
irritant chemicals. C-polymodal nociceptor units are involved with hyperalgesia and itch,
They are responsible, through the local release of vasoactive agents, for the flare around
skin injuries. 65, 180, 197

PRURITUS
Pruritus, or itching, is an unpleasant sensation that provokes the desire to scratch.6.5, 180, 196
It is the most common symptom in dermatology and may be due to specific dermatologic

62 • Structure and Function of the Skin
diseases or may be generalized without clinically evident skin disease. Pruritus may be
sharp and well localized (epicritic), or it may be poorly localized and have a burning
quality (protopathic).
The skin is richly endowed by a network of sensory nerves and receptors (see Fig. 143). The sensory nerves subserve hair follicles as well as encapsulated structures such as
Pacini's, Meissner's, and Ruffini's corpuscles." In addition, sensory nerves may end as free
nerve endings, referred to as penicillate nerve endings. The penicillate endings arise from
the terminal Schwarm cell in the dermis as tuftlike structures and give rise to an arborizing network of fine nerves, and they terminate either subepidermally or intraepidermally.
These unmyelinated penicillate nerve endings are limited to the skin, mucous membranes,
and cornea.
Although several morphologically distinct end organs have been described, a specific
end organ for pruritus has not been found. There is a clear association between Cpolymodal nociceptor activation and itch that appears to involve a subpopulation of specific itch afferent fibers. 6,5, 197
On the basis of the properties of afferent units, somatosensory activity can be subdivided into mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, and noclceptors." The nociceptors are
involved in itch and pain. Nociceptors are supplied by A [) and C fibers. The A [) fibers
(myelinated) conduct at about 10 to 20 m/sec and carry signals for spontaneous (physiologic), well-localized, pricking itch (epicritic itch). The C fibers (nonmyelinated) conduct
more slowly (2 m/sec) and subserve unpleasant, diffuse burning (pathologic) itch (protopathic itch). Both fibers enter the dorsal root of the spinal cord, ascend in the dorsal
column, and cross to the lateral spinothalamic tract. From there, they ascend to the
thalamus and, via the internal capsule, to the sensory cortex. There, the itch sensation
may be modified by emotional factors and competing cutaneous sensations.
At present, it has not been possible to isolate a universal mediator to explain pruritus,
but a host of chemical mediators have been implicated (Table 1_3).65,178,179 However, the
pathophysiology of pruritus is complicated and poorly understood for most diseases in
most species. The relative importance of these putative mediators and modulators of
pruritus in any given species, disease, or individual is rarely known.
For years it has been stated, on the basis of studies performed in humans, that
proteolytic enzymes are the most important mediators of pruritus in dogs and cats, and
that histamine is relatively unimportant. Although there is no evidence to support the
importance of proteolytic enzymes in dogs and cats, clinical studies have suggested
that histamine and leukotrienes are important, and more so in cats than in dogs (see
Chap. 8).178,179
Central factors such as anxiety, boredom, or competing cutaneous sensations (e.g.,
pain, touch, heat, and cold) can magnify or reduce the sensation of pruritus by selectively
acting on the gate-control system.w For instance, pruritus is often worse at night because
other sensory input is low. Although the mechanisms involved here are not clear, it has
been suggested that stressful conditions may potentiate pruritus through the release of
various opioid peptides (central opinergic pruritusi." Various neuropeptides, such as en-

• Table 1-3

MEDIATORS AND MODULATORS OF PRURITUS

HISTAMINE

PROTEASES

PEPTIDES

Eicosanoids
Leukotrienes
Prostaglandins
Serotonin
Platelet-activating factor

Kallikrein
Cathepsins
Trypsin
Chymotrypsin
Fibrinolysin
Leukopeptidases
Plasmin
Microbial proteases

Bradykinin
Neuropeptides (opioids)
Substance P
Vasoactive intestinal peptide

Structure and Function of the Skin • 63

FIGURE 1-45. Dog skin. Normal adipose tissue.

kephalins, endorphins, and substance P, have been demonstrated to participate in the
regulation of such cutaneous reactions as pruritus, pain, flushing, pigmentary changes, and
inflammation/"

Subcutis
The subcutis (hypodermis) is of mesenchymal ongm and is the deepest and usually
thickest layer of the skin." However, there is no subcutis in some areas for functional
reasons (e.g., lip, cheek, eyelid, external ear, and anus); in these areas, the dermis is in
direct contact with musculature and fascia. Fibrous bands that are continuous with the
fibrous structures of the dermis penetrate and lobulate the subcutaneous fat into lobules
of lipocytes (adipocytes, or fat cells) (Fig. 1-45) and form attachments of the skin to
underlying fibrous skeletal components such as fascial sheets and periosteum. The superficial portion of the subcutis projects into the overlying dermis as papillae adiposae (Fig. 146); these structures surround hair follicles, sweat glands, and vasculature to assist in
protecting these structures from pressure and shearing forces. The subcutis is about 90%
triglyceride by weight, and it functions (1) as an energy reserve, (2) in thermogenesis and
insulation, (3) as a protective padding and support, and (4) in maintaining surface contours. It is also important as a steroid reservoir and as the site of steroid metabolism and
estrogen production. The mature lipocyte is dominated by a large lipid droplet that leaves
only a thin cytoplasmic rim and pushes the nucleus to one side.
The walls of arterial and venous capillaries present in fat are much thinner than those
present in the dermis, and veil cells are not always present.P In addition, there are no
lymphatics present in fat lobules.v" The thickness of the subcutis is inversely proportional
to blood flow, with slow circulation promoting lipogenesis and fast circulation promoting
lipolysis.t'" As a result of these factors, fat is particularly susceptible to disease processes
and, with even minor injury, damage occurs in the absence of an efficient system for
removing the damaged tissue.

"See references 160. 162, 166. 170, 172, 180, 188, and 202.

64 • Structure and Function of the Skin

FIGURE 1-46. Dog skin. Papillae adiposae project upward into dennis toward the adnexae.

INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS
Intermediate filaments are major cytoskeletal proteins. Immunohistochemical studies of
tissues from normal dogs and cats have demonstrated typical mammalian staining patterns
for cytokeratin, vimentin, desmin, and neurofilament.ws" 165, 198

Senility
Mechanistically, aging appears to result, in part, from genetically predetermined programs,
and in part, from endogenous and exogenous wear and tear, with both processes expressed at the cellular and molecular levels.2 14
Senile changes have been reported in the skin of aged dogs 16 and cats. 172 The hair of
some dogs was dull and lusterless, with areas of alopecia and callus formation over
pressure points. An increase in the number of white hairs on the muzzle and body was
often seen. The footpads and noses of some dogs were hyperkeratotic, and claws tended
to become malformed and brittle.
Histologically, one may see orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of the epidermis and hair
follicles, the latter often being atrophic and containing no hairs. Atrophy of the epidermis
may be manifested as a single layer of flattened keratinocytes with pyknotic nuclei.
Dermal changes may include decreased cellularity, fragmentation and granular degeneration of collagen bundles, and occasional diminution and fragmentation of elastic fibers.
The solar elastosis (basophilic degeneration of elastic fibers) that characterizes aging
human skin is not usually seen in aged dogs and cats. It is probable that the dense
haircoat of dogs and cats protects them from the damaging effects of ultraviolet light.
Variable changes may be seen in the glands of the skin, including cystic dilatation of
epitrichial sweat glands and large, yellow, refractile granules in the secretory cells of the
epitrichial sweat glands. Arrector pili muscles become more eosinophilic, fragmented, and
vacuolated (Fig. 1-47).
Extensive studies in humans have demonstrated the following changes in senile skin:
(1) epidermal atrophy, decreased adherence of comeocytes, and flattening of the dermoepidermal junction; (2) decreased numbers of melanocytes and Langerhans' cells; (3)

Structure and Function of the Skin • 65

FIGURE 1-47. Arrector pili in
normal skin from 9-year-old dog.
Note numerous, variably sized,
randomly scattered clear vacuoles
within muscle section.

dermal atrophy (relatively acellular and avascular) and altered dermal collagen, elastin, and
glycosaminoglycans; (4) atrophy of the subcutis; (5) attenuation of the eccrine and apocrine glands and decreased sebaceous gland secretion; (6) reduction of hair follicle density;
(7) thinning, ridging, and lusterless nail plates; (8) decreased growth rate of the epidermis,
hair, and nails; (9) delayed wound healing; (10) reduced dermal clearance of fluids and
foreign materials; (11) compromised vascular responsiveness; (12) diminished eccrine and
apocrine secretions; (13) reduced sensory perception; (14) reduced vitamin D production;
(15) and impairment of the cutaneous immune and inflammatory responses." Clinical
correlates in humans of these intrinsic aging changes of the skin include alopecia, pallor,
xerosis (dry skin), increased incidence of benign and malignant neoplasms, increased
susceptibility to blister formation, predisposition to injury of the dermis and underlying
tissues, increased risk of wound infections, and thermoregulatory disturbances." Wounds
in aged beagles and boxers healed less rapidly than in young dogs. 146

Heterozygosity
Loss of heterozygosity is a genetic mechanism by which a heterozygous somatic cell
becomes either homozygous or hemizygous because the corresponding wild-type allele is
lost. 73a Loss of heterozygosity has been documented or postulated to be causative in
various neoplasms (basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma), benign nevi
(hamartomas), and a variety of dermatoses characterized by pronounced segmental occurrences.

• REFERENCES
1. Affolter VK, Moore PF: Canine histiocytic proliferative disease. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:79, 1999.
2. Al-Bagdadi FA, et al: Hair follicle cycle and shedding
in male beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 38:611, 1977.
3. AI-Bagdadi FA, et al: Histology of the hair cycle in
male beagle dogs. Am J Vet Res 40:1734, 1979.

4. Alhaidari Z, von Tscharner C: Anatomie et physiologie du follicule piJeux chez les carnivores domestiques. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 32:181, 1997.
5. Ansel JC, et al: Interactions of the skin and nervous
system. J Invest Dermatol Syrnp Proc 2:23, 1997.
6. Aoki T: Stimulation of the sweat glands in the hairy
skin of dogs by adrenaline, noradrenaline, acetylcho-

66 • Structure and Function of the Skin
line, mecholyl and pilocarpine. J Invest Dermatol 24:
545, 1955.
7. Aoki T, Wada M: Functional activity of the sweat
glands in the hairy skin of the dog. Science 114:123,
1951.
8. Arbiser JL: Angiogenesis and the skin: A primer. J
Am Acad Dermatol 34:486, 1996.
9. Badawi H, et al: Morphogenesis of the cutaneous
vasculature in fetal dogs. Assiut Vet Med J 18:30,
1987.
10. Badawi H, et al: Histogenesis of the pilosebaceous
apparatus in dogs. Assiut Vet Med J 18:38, 1987.
11. Bailey CS, et al: Cutaneous innervation of the thorax
and abdomen of the dog. Am J Vet Res 45:1689,
1984.
12. Bailey CS, et al: Spinal nerve root origins of the
cutaneous nerves of the canine pelvic limb. Am J Vet
Res 49:115, 1988.
13. Baker BB, et al: Epidermal cell renewal in the dog.
Am J Vet Res 34:93, 1973.
14. Baker BB, et al: Epidermal cell renewal in dogs after
clipping of the hair. Am J Vet Res 35:445, 1974.
15. Baker BB, Maibach HI: Epidermal cell renewal in
seborrheic skin of dogs. Am J Vet Res 48:726, 1987.
16. Baker KP: Senile changes of dog skin. J Small Anim
Pract 8:49, 1967.
17. Baker KP: Hair growth and replacement in the cat.
Br Vet J 130:327, 1974.
18. Beadleston DL, et al: Chymase and tryptase staining
of normal feline skin and of feline cutaneous mast
cell tumors. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:54, 1997.
18a. Becker AB, et al: Mast cell heterogeneity in dog
skin. Anat Rec 213:477, 198.5.
19. Bell RL, et al: Oxidative metabolism in perfused surviving dog skin. J Invest Dermatol 31:13, 1958.
20. Bell M, Montagna W: Innervation of sweat glands in
horses and dogs. Br J Dermatol 86:160, 1972.
21. Berardesca E, Borroni G: Instrumental evaluation of
cutaneous hydration. Clin Dermatol 13:323, 199.5.
22. Berardesca E, et al: Bioengineering of the Skin: Cutaneous Blood Flow and Erythema, CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, 1995.
23. Bernstein EF, Uitto J: The effcct of photodamage in
dermal extracellular matrix. Clin Dermatol 14:143,
1996.
24. Boiron G, et al. Phagocytosis of erythrocytes by human and animal epidermis. Dermatologica 165:158,
1982.
24a. Borradori L, Sonnenberg A: Structure and function
of hemidesmosomes: More than simple adhesion
complexes. J Invest Dermatol 112:411, 1999.
25. Botchkarev VA, et al: Neurotrophin-3 involvement in
the regulation of hair follicle morphogenesis. J Invest
Dermatol 111:279, 1998.
26. Brusilow SW, Munger B: Comparative physiology of
sweat. Proc Soc Exp Blol Med 110:317, 1962.
27. Burchill SA: Regulation of tyrosinase in hair follicular
melanocytes of the mouse during the synthesis of
eumelanin and phaeomelanin. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:
396, 1991.
28. Butler WF, Wright AI: Hair growth in the greyhound. J Small Anim Pract 22:655, 1981.
29. Cannon AG, et al: Gamma delta T cells in normal
and diseased canine skin. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds). Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinnemann, Boston, 1998, p 137.
30. Chambers MR, et al: The structure and function of
the slowly adapting type II mechanoreceptor in hairy
skin. Q J Exp Physiol .57:417, 1972.

31. Chesney CJ: Water: its form, function and importance
in the skin of domestic animals. J Small Anim Pract
34:65, 1993.
32. Chesney CJ: Measurement of skin hydration in normal dogs and in dogs with atopy or a scaling dermatosis. J Small Anim I'ract 36:305, 1995.
33. Chesney CJ: Mapping the canine skin: a study of coat
relative humidity in Newfoundland dogs. Vet Dermatal 7:35, 1996.
34. Chesney CJ: The microclimate of the canine coat:
The effects of heating on coat and skin temperature
and relative humidity. Vet Dermatol 8:183, 1997.
35. Chikakane K, Takahashi H: Measurement of skin pH
and its significance in cutaneous disases. Clin Dermatal 13:299, 1995.
36. Chuang CM, et al: Adhesion molecules in skin development: Morphogenesis of feather and hair. Ann NY
Acad Sci 642:263, 1991.
37. Clarys P, Barel A: Quantitative evaluation of skin surface lipids. Clin Dermatol 13:307, 1995.
38. Cochet P, et al: Skin distribution of fipronil by microautoradiography followtng topical administration to
the beagle dog. Eur J Dmg Metab Pharmacokinet 22:
211, 1997.
39. Comben N: Observations on the mode of growth of
the hair of the dog. Br Vet J 107:231, 19.51.
40. Cotton DWK, van Hasselt 1': Sweating on the hairy
surface of the beagle. J Invest Dermatol 59:313,
1972.
41. Cotton DWK, et al: Nature of the sweat glands in the
hairy skin of the Beagle. Dermatologica 150:75, 1975.
42. Couchman JR, et al: Proteoglycans and glycoproteins
in hair follicle development and cycling. Ann NY
Acad Sci 642:243, 1991.
43. Couchman JR, et al: Fibronectin-cell interactions. J
Invest Dermatol 94:7S, 1990.
44. Cox HU, et al: Distribution of staphylococcal species
on clinically healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 46:1824,
198.5.
45. Credille KM, et al: The use of hair plucking to assess
canine hair follicle regeneration: Implications for the
bulge activation hypothesis. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 14:
119, 1998.
46. De Las Mulas JM, et al: Immunohistochemical distribution of vimentin, desmin, glial fibrillary acidic protein and neurofilament proteins in feline tissues. J Vet
Med A 41:1, 1994.
47. De Las Mulas JM, et al: Immunohistochemical distribution of keratin proteins in feline tissues. J Vet Med
A 41:283, 1994.
47a. De Los Monteros AE, et al: Coordinate expression
of cytokeratins 7 and 20 in feline and canine carcinomas. Vet Pathol 36:179, 1999.
47b. DeMora F, et al: Canine cutaneous mast cell dispersion and histamine secretory characterization. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 39:421, 1993.
48. Devriese LA, et al: Identification and characterization
of staphylococci isolated from cats. Vet Microhiol 9:
279, 1984.
49. Draize HH: The determination of the pH of the skin
of man and common laboratory animals. J Invest
Dermatol.5:77, 1942.
50. Dunstan RW: A pathomechanistic approach to diseases of the hair follicle. Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp
17:37, 199.5.
51. Elder D, et al: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin
VIII. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, Philadelphia, 1997.
52. Elsner P, et al: Bioengineering of the Skin: Water

Structure and Function of the Skin • 67
and the Stratum Corneum. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL,1994.
52a. Emerson JL, Cross RF: The distribution of mast
cells in normal canine skin. Am J Vet Res 26:1379,
1965.
53. Eun HC: Evaluation of skin blood flow by laser
Doppler flowmetry. Clin Dermtol 13:337, 1995.
54. Feinman JM: The Rex cat: A mutation for the
masses. Vet Med (SAC) 78:1717,1983.
55. Ferrer L, et al: Immunocytochemical demonstration
of intermediate filament proteins, S-100 protein and
CEA in apocrine sweat glands and apocrine gland
derived lesions of the dog. J Vet Med A 37:569, 1990.
56. Fine JD: Structure and antigenicity of the skin basement membrane zone. J Cutan Pathol 18:401, 1991.
57. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dermatology in General Medicine, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York,
1993.
57a. Foster AP: A study of the number and distribution
of cutaneous mast cells in cats with disease not affecting the skin. Vet Dermatol 5:17, 1994.
58. Foster KA: Composition of the secretion from the
eccrine sweat glands of the eat's foot pad. J Physiol
184:66, 1966.
59. Gallo RL, Huttner KM: Antimicrobial peptides: An
emerging concept in cutaneous biology. J Invest Dermatol Ill: 739, 1998.
60. Garrot C: Les techniques peroxydase-antiperoxydase
et immunofluorescence directe appliquee 11. la detection d'immunoglobulines et de complement C3 dans
la peau saine du chien. Proc GEDAC 7:14, 1991.
61. Garthwaite G, et al: Location of immunoglobulins and
complement (C3) at the surface and within the skin
of dogs. J Comp Pathol 93:185, 1983.
62. Gibson WT, et al: Immunology of the hair follicle.
Ann NY Acad Sci 642:291, 1991.
63. Gillian AC, et al: The human hair follicle: A reservoir
of CD40+ B7-deficient Langerhans cells that repopulate epidermis after UVB exposure. J Invest Dermatol
IlO:422, 1998.
64. Goebeler M, et al: The chemokine repertoire of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells and its
regulation by inflammatory cytokines. J Invest Dermatol 108:445, 1997.
65. Goldsmith LA (ed): Physiology, Biochemistry, and
Molecular Biology of the Skin, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, New York, 1991.
66. Gottschaldt KM, et al: Functional characteristics of
mechanoreceptors in sinus hair follicles of the cat. J
Physiol 235:287, 1973.
67. Cuaguere E, et al: Troubles de la pigmentation melanique des carnivores Ire partie: Elements de physiopathologie. Point vet 17:549, 1985.
68. Gunaratnam P, Wilkinson GT: A study of normal hair
growth in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 24:445, 1983.
69. Halata Z: Postnatale Entwicklung sensibler Nervenendigungen in der Unbehaarten Nasenhaut der Katze.
Bibl Anat 19:210, 1981.
70. Hale PA: Periodic hair shedding by a normal bitch. J
Small Anim Pract 23:345, 1982.
71. Hales JM, Camp RD: Potent T cell stimulatory material with antigenic properties in stratum corneum of
normal human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1l0:725, 1998.
72. Halprin KM, Chow DC: Metabolic pathways in perfused dog skin. J Invest Dermatol 36:431, 1961.
73. Headington JT, Cerio R: Dendritic cells and the dermis: 1990. Am J DermatopathoI12:217, 1990.
73a. Happle R: Loss of heterozygosity in human skin. J
Am Acad Dermatol 41:143, 1999.

74. Hekmatpanah J: Organization of tactile dermatomes,
Cl through L4 in cat. J Neurophysiol 24:129, 1961.
75. Hendriks WH, et al: Seasonal hair growth in the
adult domestic cat (Felis catus). Comp Biochem Physiol Il6A:29, 1997.
76. Hensel H: Thennoreception and Temperature Regulation. Academic Press, New York, 1981.
77. Hobson DW: Dermal and Ocular TOxicology. Fundamentals and Methods. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
1991.
78. Hohl D, et al: In vitro and rapid in situ transglutaminase assays for congenital ichthyoses-a comparative
study. J Invest Dermatol IlO:268, 1998.
79. Holbrook KA, Minami SI: Hair follicle embryogenesis
in the human. Characterization of events in vivo and
in vitro. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:167, 1991.
80. Huff JC: Epithelial polymeric immunoglobulin receptors. J Invest Dennatol 94:74S, 1990.
81. Iggo A, Muir AR: The structure and function of a
slowly adapting touch corpuscle in hairy skin. J Physiol 200:763, 1969.
82. Irwin DHG: Tension lines in the skin of the dog. J
Small Anim Pract 7:593, 1966.
83. Isitor GN, Weinman DE: Origin and early development of canine circumanal glands. Am J Vet Res 40:
487, 1979.
84. Hum S, et al: Mechanism of action of androgen in
dermal papilla cells. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:385, 1991.
85. Ivanyi D, et al: Patterns of expression of feline cytokeratins in healthy epithelia and mammary carcinoma
cells. Am J Vet Res 53:304, 1992.
86. Iwabuchi T: General sweating on the hairy skin of the
dog and its mechanism. J Invest Dennatol 49:61,
1967.
87. Iwasaki T: An electron microscopic study on secretory
process in canine apocrine sweat gland. Jpn J Vet Sci
43:733, 1981.
88. Iwasaki T: Electron microscopy of the canine apocrine sweat duct. Jpn J Vet Sci 45:739, 1983.
89. Iwasaki T, et al: Expression of basement membrane
macromolecules and integrin receptors by keratinocytes during canine wound healing. In: Kwochka KW,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 339.
90. Iwaskai T, et al: Immunomapping of basement membrane zone macromolecules in canine salt-split skin. J
Vet Med Sci 59:391, 1997.
91. Jackson R: The lines of Blashko: A review and reconsideration. Br J Dermatol 95:349, 1976.
92. Jenkinson DM, Blackburn PA: The distribution of
nerves, monoamine oxidase and cholinesterase in the
skin of the dog and cat. Res Vet Sci 9:521, 1968.
93. Jenkinson DM: Myoepithelial cells of the sweat
glands of domestic animals. Res Vet Sci 12:152, 1971.
94. Jenkinson DM: Sweat and sebaceous glands and their
function in domestic animals. In: von Tscharner C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology 1. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 229.
95. Kalaher KM, et al: Direct immunofluorescence testing of normal feline nasal planum and footpad. Cornell Vet 80:105, 1990.
96. Kang S, et al: Pharmacology and molecular action of
retinoids and vitamin D in skin. J Invest Dermatol
Symp Proc l:l5, 1996.
97. Karasek MA: Mechanisms of angiogenesis in normal
and diseased skin. Int J Dermatol 30:831, 1991.
98. Kealey T, et al: Intermediary metabolism of the human hair follicle. Ann NY Acad. Sci 642:301, 1991.
99. Kitchell RL, et al: Electrophysiologic studies of the

68 • Structure and Function of the Skin
cutaneous nerves of the thoracic limb of the dog. Am
J Vet Res 41:61, 1980.
100. Kobayashi S, et al: Experimental studies on the hemitrichosis and the nervous influences on the hair
growth. Acta Neuroreg 18:169, 1958.
101. Konig M, et al: Micromorphology of the circumanal
glands and the tail gland area of dogs. Vlaams Diergeneesk Tijdschr 54:278, 1985.
102. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Comparative Dermatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,
1964.
102a. Kube P, et al: Distribution, density, and heterogeneity of canine mast cell depending on fixation techniques. Histochem Cell BioI 110:129, 1998.
103. Kubilus J, et al: Involucrin-like proteins in non-primates. J Invest Dermatol 94:210, 1990.
104. Kuhn RA: Organization of tactile dermatornes in cat
and monkey. J Neurophysiol 16:169, 1953.
105. Kwochka KW: Differential diagnosis of feline miliary
dermatitis. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
Therapy, 9th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1986, p. 538.
106. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of
epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of beaglcs and cocker spaniels with healthy skin. Am J Vet
Res 50:587, 1989.
107. Kwochka KW: The structure and function of epidermal lipids. Vet Dermatol 4:151, 1993.
108. Lane EB, et al: Stem cells in hair follicles. Cytoskeletal studies. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:197, 1991.
109. Lavker RM, et al: Hair follicle stem cells: Their location, role in hair cycle, and involvement in skin tumor
formation. J Invest Dermatol 101:16s, 1993.
110. Leigh 1M, et al: The Keratinocyte Handbook. Camhridge University Press, New York, 1994.
111. Levine N: Pigmentation and Pigmentary Disorders.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1993.
112. Lichti U: Hair follicle transglutaminases. Ann NY
Acad Sci 642:82, 1991.
113. Lighnter VA: Tenascin: does it playa role in epidermal morphogenesis and homeostasis? J Invest Dermatol 102:273, 1994.
114. Lindholm JS, et al: Variation of skin surface lipid
composition among mammals. Comp Biochem Physiol [B]. 69:75, 1981.
115. Little CC: The Inheritance of Coat Color in Dogs.
Comstock Publishing Associates, Ithaca, NY, 1957.
116. Lloyd DH, Garthwaite G: Epidermal structure and
surface topography of canine skin. Res Vet Sci 33:99,
1982.
117. Lovell JE, Getty R: The hair follicle, epidermis, dermis, and skin glands of the dog. Am J Vet Res 18:
873, 1957.
118. Luger TA, et al: The role of a-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone in cutaneous biology. J Invest Dermatol
Symp Pmc 2:87, 1997.
119. Lyne AG, Short BF: Biology of the Skin and Hair
Growth. American Elsevier Publishing Co., New
York, 1965.
120. Machida H, et al: Histochemical and phannacological
properties of the sweat glands of the dog. Am J Vet
Res 117:566, 1966.
121. Maita K, Ishida K: Structure and development of the
perianal gland of the dog. Jpn J Vet Sci 37:349, 1975.
122. Manning TO, et al: Cutaneous laser-Doppler velocimetry in nine animal species. Am J Vet Res 52:1960,
1991.
123. Marchal T, et al: CD18 Birbeck granule containing

dendritic cells present in dog epidermis are equivalent of human epidermal Langerhans cells. Eur J
DermatoI3:148, 1993.
124. Marchal T, et al: Immunophenotypic and ultrastructural evidence of Langerhans cell origin of the canine
cutaneous histocytoma. Acta Anat 153:189, 1995.
125. Marchal T, et al: Quantitative assessment of feline
epidennal Langerhans cells. Br J Dermatol 136:961,
1997.
126. Marchal ISA, et al: Immunophenotypic characterization of feline Langerhans cells. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 58:1, 1997.
127. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Scanning electron microscopical studies of the living epidermis and stratum corneum in dogs. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, Oxford,
1993, p 131.
128. McMillan JR, et al: Hemidesmosomes show abnormal
association with the keratin filament network in junctional forms of epidermolysis bullosa. J Invest Dermatol 110:132, 1998.
129. Meyer W, Neurand K: The distribution of enzymes in
the epidermis of the domestic cat. Arch Dermatol
Res 260:29, 1977.
130. Meyer W, Neurand K: Zur Leuzinaminopeptidaseaktivitat in normaler und geschadigter Katzenhaut.
Zentrabl Vetarinarmed [B] 24:601, 1977.
131. Meyer W, et al: Zur Struktur und Funkten der Fussballen der Katze. Kleintierpraxis 35:67, 1990.
132. Meyer W, Neurand K: Comparison of skin pH in
domesticated and laboratory mammals. Arch Dermatol Res 283:16, 1991.
133. Meyer W, et al: A computer-assisted method for the
determination of hair cuticula patterns in mammals.
Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 110:81, 1997.
134. Miller SJ, et al: Re-epithelialization of porcine skin by
the sweat apparatus. J Invest Dermatol 110:13, 1998.
135. Montagna W: Comparative anatomy and physiology of
the skin. Arch Dermatol 96:357, 1967.
136. Moore PF, et al: The use of immunological reagents
in defining the pathogenesis of canine skin diseases
involving proliferation of leukocytes. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds), Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 77.
137. Mundt HC, Stafforst C: Production and composition
of dog hair. In: Edney ATB (ed): Nutrition, Malnutrition and Dietetics on the Dog and Cat. British Veterinary Association and Waltham Centre for Pet Nutrition, London, 1987, p 62.
138. Nestle Fa, Nicoloff BJ: A fresh morphological and
functional look at dermal dendritic cells. J Cutan
Pathol 22:385, 1995.
139. Nicolaides N, et al: The skin surface lipids of man
compared with those of eighteen species of animals. J
Invest Dermatol 51:83, 1968.
140. Nicolaides N, et al: Diesterwaxes in surface lipids of
animal skin. Lipids 5:299, 1970.
141. Neilsen SW: Glands of the canine skin-morphology
and distribution. Am J Vet Res 14:448, 1953.
142. Nikkari T: Comparative chemistry of sebum. J Invest
Dermatol 62:257, 1974.
143. Noble WC: The Skin Microflora and Microbial Skin
Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1993.
144. O'Cuin WM, Manabe M: The role of trichohyalin in
hair follicle differentiation and its expression in nonfollicular epithelia. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:51, 1991.
145. Ohashi T, et al: Effects of vibratory stimulation and

Structure and Function of the Skin • 69
mechanical massage on micro- and lymph-circulation
in the acupuncture points between the paw pads of
anesthetized dogs. Recent Advances in Cardiovascular
Diseases. Osaka National Cardiovascular Center,
Osaka, 1991, p 125.
146. Orentreich N, Selmanowitz VJ: Levels of biological
functions with aging. Trans NY Acad Sci 3l:992,
1969.
147. Paus R, et al: Neural mechanisms of hair growth
control. J Invest Dermatol Symp. Proc 2:61, 1997.
148. Peaston AE, et al: Evaluation of commercially available antibodies to cytokeratin. Intermediate filaments
and laminin in normal cat pinna. J Vet Diagn Invest
4:306, 1992.
149. Pittelkow MR: Growth factors in cutaneous biology
and disease. Adv Dermatol 7:55, 1992.
150. Priestley GC: Molecular Aspects of Dermatology.
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1993.
151. Prieur OJ, Collier LL: The Maltese dilution of cats.
Feline Pract 14:23, 1984.
152. Queinnec B: Nomenclatures des robes du chat. Rev
Med Vet 134:349, 1983.
153. Rach J: Coat color and personality. Cat Fancy, July
1988, p 58.
154. Restano L, et al: Blashko lines of the face: A step
closer to completing the map. J Am Acad Dermatol
39:1028, 1998.
155. Robinson R: Genetics for Cat Breeders. Pergamon
Press, Oxford, England, 1977.
156. Rook AJ, Walton GS: Comparative Physiology and
Pathology of the
Skin. Blackwell Scientific
Publications, Oxford, England, 1965.
157. Roy WE: Role of the sweat gland in eczema in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 124:51, 1954.
158. Ruedisueli FL, et al: The measurement of skin pH in
normal dogs of different breeds. In: Kwochka KW, et
al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 521.
159. Rutner 0, et al: Merkel cell carcinoma. J Am Acad
Dermatol 29:143, 1993.
160. Ryan TJ, Curri SB: The structure of fat. Clin Dermatol 7:37, 1989.
161. Ryan TJ, Mortimer PS: Cutaneous lymphatic system.
Clin Dermatol 13:417, 1995.
162. Ryan TJ: Lymphatics and adipose tissue. Clin Dermatol 13:493, 1995.
163. Ryder ML: Seasonal changes in the coat of the cat.
Res Vet Sci 21:280, 1976.
164. Saijonmaa-Koulumles LE, Lloyd DH: Colonization of
the canine skin with bacteria. Vet Dermatol 7:153,
1996.
165. Sandusky GE, et al: Immunocytochemical study of
tissue from clinically normal dogs and of neoplasms
using keratin monoclonal anitbodies. Am J Vet Res
52:613, 1991.
166. Schummer A, et al: The Circulatory System, the Skin,
and the Cutaneous Organs of the Domestic Mammals. Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin, 1981.
167. Schwarz R: Haarwachstum und Haarwechsel-eine
Zusatzliche funktonelle Beanspruchung der Hautam Beispiel markhaltiger Primarhaarfollikel. Kleintierpraxis 37:67, 1992.
168. Schwarz R, et al: Die gesunde Haut von Hund und
Katze, Kleintierpraxis 37:67, 1992.
169. Schwarz R, et al: Die gesunde Haut von Hund und
Katze. Kleintierpraxis 26:395, 1981.
170. Schwarz R, et al: Micromorphology of the skin (epi-

dermis, dermis, subcutis) of the dog. Onderstepoort J
Vet Res 46:105, 1979.
171. Schwarz R, et al: Sinus haarwechsel ist nicht gleich
Fellhaarwechsel Histologische Untersuchungen am
Sinushaarfollikel der Katze. Kleintierpraxis 42:517,
1997.
172. Scott OW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
173. Scott SW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
174. Scott OW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537, 1984.
175. Scott OW, et al: Pitfalls in immunofluorescence testing in canine dermatology. Cornell Vet 73:131, 1983.
176. Scott OW, et al: Pitfalls in immunofluorescence testing in dermatology. II. Pemphigus-like antibodies in
the cat, and direct immunofluorescence testing of
normal dog nose and lip. Cornell Vet 73:275, 1983.
177. Scott OW: The biology of hair growth and its disturbances. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology 1. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 3.
178. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine allergic pruritus. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:52, 1993.
179. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Medical management of
allergic pruritus in the cat, with emphasis on feline
atopy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:103, 1993.
180. Scott OW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
181. Scott GA, Goldsmith LA. Homeobox genes and skin
development: A review. J Invest Dermatol 101:3,
1993.
182. Seaman WJ, Chang SH: Dermal perifollicular mineralization of toy poodle bitches. Vet Pathol 21:122,
1984.
.
183. Sharaf OM, et al: Skin surface lipids of the dog.
Lipids 12:786, 1977.
184. Sheretz EC: Misuse of hair analysis as a diagnostic
tool. Arch DermatoI12l:1504, 1985.
185. Smack DP, et al: Keratin and keratinization. J Am
Acad Dermatol 30:85, 1994.
186. Soma T, et al: Analysis of apoptotic cell death in
human hair follicles in vivo and in vitro. J Invest
Dermatoll11:948, 1998.
187. Spearman RIC: The Integument. Cambridge University Press, London, England, 1973.
188. Strickland JH, Calhoun ML: The integumentary system of the cat. Am J Vet Res 24:1018, 1963.
189. Suter MM, et al: Extracellular ATP and some of its
analogs induce transient rises in cytosolic free calcium
in individual canine keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol
97:223, 1991.
190. Suter MM, et al: Monoclonal antibodies: Cell surface
markers for canine keratinocytes. Am J Vet Res 40:
1367, 1987.
191. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte differentiation in the
dog. In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology 1. Bailliere Tindall,
Philadelphia, 1990, p 252.
192. Suter MM, et al: Comparison of growth and differentiation of normal and neoplastic canine keratinocyte
cultures. Vet Pathol 28:131, 1991.
193. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte biology and pathology.
Vet Dermatol 8:67, 1997.
194. Takahashi Y: Functional activity of the eccrine sweat

70 • Structure and Function of the Skin
glands in the toe-pads of the dog. Tohoku J Exp Med
83:205, 1964.
195. Tanaka T, et al: The innermost cells of the outer root
sheath in human anagen hair follicles undergo specialized keratinization mediated by apoptosis. J Cutan
Pathol 25:316, 1998.
196. Thoday AJ, Friedmann PS: Scientific Basis of Dermatology. A Physiological Approach. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1986.
197. Tuckett RP, Wei JY: Response to an itch-producing
substance in the cat. II. Cutaneous receptor populations with unmyelinated axons. Brain Res 413:95,
1987.
198. VOS JH, et al: An immunohistochemical study of canine tissues with vimentin, desmin, glial fibrillary
acidic protein, and neurofilament antisera. Zentralbl
Veterinanned [A] 36:561, 1989.
199. VOS JH, et al: The keratin and vimentin distribution
patterns in the epithelial structures of the canine anal
region. Anat Rec 234:391, 1992.
200. Vos, JH, et al: The expression of keratins, vimentin,
neurofilament proteins, smooth muscle actin, neuronspecific enolase, and synaptophysin in tumors of the
specific glands in the canine anal region. Vet Pathol
30:352, 1993.
201. Wallengren J: Vasoactive peptides in the skin. J Invest
Dermatol Syrnp Proc 2:87, 1997.
202. Webb AJ, Calhoun ML: The microscopic anatomy of
the skin of mongrel dogs. Am J Vet Res 15:274, 1954.
203. Weinberg WC, et al: Modulation of hair follicle cell
proliferation and collagenolytic activity by specific
growth factors. Ann NY Acad Sci 642:281, 1991.
203a. Welle M, at al: Distribution, density and heterogeneity of canine and bovine skin mast cells depending on
fixation techniques. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dennatology III, ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 488.

204. Whalen LR, Kitchell RL: Electrophysiologic studies
of the cutaneous nerves of the head of the dog. Am J
Vet Res 44:615, 1983.
205. Wheatley VR, Sher OW: Studies of the lipids of dog
skin. 1. The chemical composition of dog skin lipids. J
Invest Dermatol 36:169, 1961.
206. White SO, Yager JA: Resident dendritic cells in the
epidermis: Langerhans cells, Merkel cells and melanocytes. Vet Dennatol 6:1, 1995.
207. Wilkie JSN, et al: Morphometric analyses of the skin
of dogs with atopic dermatitis and correlations with
cutaneous and plasma histamine and total serum IgE.
Vet Pathol 27:179, 1990.
208. Wilkinson JE, et al: Long-term cultivation of canine
keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 88:202, 1987.
209. Wilkinson JE, et al: Ultrastructure of cultured canine
oral keratinoeytes. Am J Vet Res 50:1161, 1989.
210. Wilkinson JE, et al: Antigen expression in cultured
oral keratinocytes from dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:445,
1991.
211. Winkelmann RK, Schmit RW: Cholinesterase in the
skin of the rat, dog, cat, guinea pig and rabbit. J
Invest Dermatol 33:185, 1959.
212. Winstanley EW: The rate of mitotic division in regenerating epithelium in the dog. Res Vet Sci 18:144,
1975.
213. Wright M, Walter S: The Book of the Cat. Summit
Books, New York, 1980.
214. Yaar M: Molecular mechanisms of skin aging. Adv
Dermatol 10:63, 1995.
215. Yager JA, Scott OW: The skin and appendages. In:
Jubb KVF, et aI (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals, 4th ed, Vol 1. Academic Press, New York, 1993,
p 531.
216. Zlotkin SH: Hair analysis. A useful tool or a waste of
money? Int J Dermatol 24:161, 1985.

Chapter

2
Diagnostic Methods

• THE SYSTEMATIC APPROACH
Skin diseases are unique in medicine because the lesions and the symptoms are external
and potentially visible to the owner and practitioner. This difference offers several unique
opportunities for the practitioner. The progression of skin lesions and diseases can often
be determined with a good history. Incomplete histories may eventually be amended
because the chronic, recurrent nature of many diseases allows the practitioner to instruct
clients in what observations they should try to make. The educated client may then add
relevant information about the course of the disease. The physical examination reveals the
gross pathologic lesions that are present for direct examination. With no other organ
system is this great amount of information so readily available.
To benefit optimally from these opportunities, the clinician uses a systematic approach; this greatly increases the probability of determining the correct diagnosis in the
most cost-effective manner. Ideally, a thorough examination and appropriate diagnostic
procedures are accomplished the first time that the patient is seen and before any
masking treatment has been initiated. However, in practice, many clients are reluctant to
spend money on diagnostic tests, particularly for the initial occurrence of a problem. This
makes a thorough history and physical examination even more important, because they
often are the only tools available for arriving at a differential diagnosis.
At the first visit, it is important to establish the client's reliability as a historian and
observer. The least expensive tool available to the practitioner is the education of the
client about signs and symptoms to look for. The clinician can develop a better relationship with clients and gain valuable information by training clients in what they should
observe and watch for, especially if there is a poor response to treatment or a recurrence.
Spending some time educating the client in the value of this information often leads to
better acceptance of the costs associated with future treatment.
A rational approach to the accurate diagnosis of dermatologic diseases is presented in
Table 2-1.

• RECORDS
Recording historical facts, physical examination findings, and laboratory data in a systematic way is particularly important for patients with skin disease. Many dermatoses are
chronic, and skin lesions may be slow to change. For this reason, many practitioners use
outline sketches of the patient, which enable the clinician to draw the location and the
extent of lesions.
Figure 2-1 is a record form for noting physical examination and laboratory findings
for dermatology cases. Most important, the form leads the clinician to consider the case in
a systematic manner. It also enables one to apply pertinent descriptive terms, saves time,
and ensures that no important information is omitted. This form details only dermatologic
data and should be used as a supplement to the general history and physical examination
record. A special dermatologic history form is also useful, especially for patients with
allergies and chronic diseases (Fig. 2-2).
71

72 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2- I

STEPS TO A DERMATOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS

MAJOR STEP

KEY POINTS TO DETERMINE OR QUESTIONS TO ANSWER

Chief complaint
Signalment
Dermatologic history

Why is the client seeking veterinary care?
Record the animal's age, breed, sex, and weight
Obtain data about the onginal Ieslon's location, appearance, onset, and
rate of progression. Also determine the degree of pnuitus, contagion
to other animals or people, and possible seasonal incidence. Relationship to diet and environmental factors and the response to previous
medications are also important
Medical history that does not directly seem to relate should also be
reviewed
Determine what the clients initially noticed that indicated a problem.
Hepeat questions and ask in a different way to determine how certain
the clients are and whether they understand the questions
Determine the distribution pattern and the regional location of lesions.
Certain patterns are diagnostically significant
Closely examine the skin to identify primary and secondary lesions
Determine skin and hair quality (e.g., thin, thick, turgid, elastic, dull,
oily, or dry)
Observe the configurations of specific skin lesions and their relationship
to each other
Differential diagnosis is developed on the basis of the preceding data.
The most likely diagnoses are recorded in order of probability
A plan is presented to the client. The client and the clinician together
then agree on a plan
Simple and inexpensive office diagnostic procedures that confirm or rule
out any of the most likely (first three or four) differential diagnostic
possibilities should be done
More complex or expensive diagnostic tests or procedures are then recommended
Clients may elect to forgo these tests and pursue less likely differential
diagnOStiC possibilities in attempts to save money. Often, this approach
is not cost effective when the expense of inefficient medications and
repeated examination is considered
Clients may elect to pursue a therapeutic trial instead of diagnOStic
procedures. Trial therapies should be selected so that further diagnostic information is obtained. Generally, glucocorticoids and progestational drugs are not acceptable because little diagnostic information is
obtained
Plan additional tests, observations of therapeutic trials, and re-evaluations
of signs and symptoms to narrow the list and provide a definitive
diagnosis

Previous medical history
Client credibility

Physical examination

Differential diagnosis
Diagnostic or therapeutic plan
Diagnostic and laboratory aids

Trial therapy

Narrowing the differential diagnosis

The disadvantage of the forms is that many chronic cases have tremendous variations
in the type of lesions and their distribution, making a map confusing, For example, how
would one draw the following alopecia lesion? A lO-cm plaque in the flank fold has a
central (8-cm) zone of lichenification, hyperpigmentation, alopecia, and crusts. The outer
(2-cm) margin is alopecic and has a papular dermatitis with mild hyperpigmentation of
lattice configuration. Peripheral to the plaque are occasional papules and pustules. Representing several different lesions on a small diagram is difficult or, if done, is often
unreadable. This can make a diagram unsatisfactory to use. Therefore, the authors have
found that brief written descriptions of lesions in various body regions are preferable to
diagrams in complicated cases .

• HISTORY

General Concepts
The pet's disease is like an unsolved mystery in which the client is the witness to what has
occurred and the veterinarian is the detective who must ascertain what the client ob-

Diagnostic Methods • 73

FIGURE 2- I. Dermatology examination sheet.

74 • Diagnostic Methods

PATIENT HISTORY
Client Name:
Pet's Name:
Chief Complaint:
Age of pet when acquired:
Age of pet now:
How long has your pet had this problem?
Is there a time when the problem is less severe or the itching is less intense?
What was the problem like initially and where did it start?
__Normal skin, just itchy
__Rash
__Redness
__Nose
__Neck
__Tail
__Around eyes
__Back
__Front legs
__Ears
__Rump
__Front paws
__Abdomen
__Groin
Has it spread? __Yes __No If so, to what sites:

_
_
_
_
_

__Hair Loss
__Back legs
__Back paws
__Chest

__Pimples

_

Does your pet scratch, chew, lick, or rub any of the following areas? Please check all that apply:
__Tail
__Back legs
__Neck
Nose
__Back paws
__Back
__Front legs
__Around eyes
__Ears
__Chest
__Rump
__Front paws
__Groin
__Abdomen
Comments:
Other pets in environment? State how many:
__Dogs
_ _Cats
__Birds
__Rodents
__Large/farm animals - what type?
Do any other pets have skin problems? Describe:

__Rabbits
_

__No
Do any people in the household have skin problems? __Yes
Describe:
Amount of time pet spends:
__% indoors
__% outdoors
Are symptoms any worse?
indoors
outdoors
Do any relatives of your pet have skin problems that you are aware of? __Yes
Describe:
Do you use routine flea control? __Yes
No
What types of products to you use? Brand:
_Powders
__Dips
__Sprays
__Collars
__Baths
Do you use insecticides in your home? __Yes __No
Please list any medications/injections your pet has had for this problem?
Did they seem to help? Ifso, which one(s)?
What is your pet's regular diet?
What vitamins, supplements, or treats are given?
Does your pet do any of the following?
_ _Vomit
__Cough
__Sneeze
__Runny eyes
__Drink excessively
__Urinate excessively
No
Has your pet ever had an ear infection? __Yes
Is your pet's appetite normal?
__Yes __No
__Yes __No
Has it changed recently?
Additional Comments:

_

_
__morning
__No

__night
_

_
_
_
_

__Diarrhea __Limp

FIGURE 2-2. Dermatology history sheet.

Diagnostic Methods • 77
• Table 2-3

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON-NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION)

BREED

DISEASE

Abyssinian cat

Follicular dysplasia
Idiopathic ceruminous otitis externa
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia
Hypothyroidism
Adult-onset demodicosis
Atopy
Demodicosis
Follicular dysplasia, flank
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sebaceous adenitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Immunoproliferative enteropathy
Atopy
Malassezia dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Skin fold intertrigo
Atopy
Demodicosis
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) deficiency
Sebaceous adenitis
Vitiligo
Epidermolysis bullosa
Hypothyroidism
Atopy
Demodicosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Hyperadrenocorticism
Patterned alopecia
Tail fold intertrigo
Atopy
Demodicosis
Food hypersensitivity
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Sertoli cell syndrome
Solar dermatitis (white dogs)
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Sternal callus
Complement deficiency
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Hypothyroidism
Follicultis and furunculosis, bacterial
Atopy
Furunculosis, scarring and bacterial
Lethal acrodermatitis
Solar dermatitis
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Syringohydromelia
Atopy
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Demodicosis
Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis
Adrenal sex hormone abnormalities
Pemphigus foliaceus
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Hyposomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Table continued on [olloiouu; page

Afghan hound
Airedale

Akita

Basenji
Basset hound

Beagle

Belgian sheepdog (Belgian Tervuren)
Berger de Beauce
Borzoi
Boston terrier

Boxer

Brittany spaniel

Bullmastiff and Mastiff
Bull terrier

Cavalier King Charles spaniel
Chesapeake Bay retriever
Chihuahua
ChowChow

78 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2-3

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON·NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued

BREED

DISEASE

Collie

Bullous pemphigoid
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Nasal furunculosis, bacterial
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Sertoli cell syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Follicular dysplasia
Acanthosis nigricans
Alopecia areata
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Folliculitis and pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Juvenile cellulitis
Linear IgA pustular dermatosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Nodular panniculitis (sterile)
Pattern alopecia (ears)
Pattern alopecia (ventral)
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Sternal callus
Vasculitis (idiopathic)
Atopy
Demodicosis
Drug reactions
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Solar dermatitis
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Demodicosis
Drug reaction (sulfas)
Flank sucking
Follicular dysplasia
Folliculitis and pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Vitiligo
Hereditary footpad hyperkeratosis
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Atopy
Demodicosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Folliculitis and pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Hypothyroidism
Malassezia dermatitis
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Tail fold intertrigo
Atopy
Cellulitis (folliculitis and furunculosis), bacterial
Collagen disorder of footpads
Contact hypersensitivity
Discoid lupus erythematosus

Curly-coated retrievers
Dachshund

Dalmatian

Doberman pinscher

Dogue de Bordeaux
English bulldog

German shepherd

Diagnostic Methods • 75

served. As this information is extracted, the veterinarian becomes the lawyer to determine
whether the client is a credible or qualified witness. Obtaining a thorough history and
being attentive to clues from the client are skills that must be practiced and developed by
the clinician in order to develop a tentative diagnosis. A comprehensive history in conjunction with a thorough dermatologic examination is helpful for another practical reason:
This is often when the veterinarian initially establishes her or his credibility as a professional with the client. In veterinary dermatology, the client-veterinarian relationship is
often important for a successful outcome. Because many chronic diseases necessitate
lifelong control and can be frustrating for client and veterinarian alike, it is critical for the
client-veterinarian relationship to start well. If the veterinarian is thorough and obtains the
most information possible from the history and the dermatologic examination, the client is
more likely to recognize the effort and expertise of the veterinarian. These clients are
often more agreeable to pursuing diagnostic tests or trial therapies if the information from
the initial exhaustive examination is not sufficient for a diagnosis. Cursory examinations
leave a sense of insecurity in some clients, making them reluctant to follow recommendations based on such examinations.

Owner's Chief Complaint
The owner's chief complaint, or chief cause of concern, is often one of the major signs
initially used in establishing a differential diagnosis. Addressing the client's chief complaint
is an important step in achieving satisfaction of clients and obtaining their confidence and
often initiates a favorable client-veterinarian relationship. Other findings not directly related to the chief complaint may be uncovered. Although these additional findings are
important to discuss, the client's chief complaint must always be addressed.

Age
Some dermatologic disorders are age related, so age is important in the dermatologic
history.v" For example, demodicosis usually begins in young dogs before sexual maturity.
Allergies tend to appear in more mature animals, probably because repeated exposure to
the antigen must occur and the immune response has to occur before clinical signs
develop. Reactivity to intradermal testing in cats has also been correlated with age. 4a
Hormonal disorders tend to occur more frequently in animals between 6 and 10 years of
age, and most neoplasms develop in mature to older patients. Most of the ages listed in
Table 2-2 refer to the usual age at the beginning of the disease, not necessarily the age
at which the animal presents.

Breed
Breed predilection determines the incidence of some skin disorders (Table 2-3).9. 10 For
example, primary seborrhea is common in Cocker spaniels; acanthosis nigricans usually
occurs in dachshunds; adult-onset hyposomatotropism occurs in Keeshonds; hypogonadism
in intact males is found in Chow Chows; adrenal sex hormone imbalances occur in
Pomeranians, dermatomyositis is found in Shetland sheepdogs (shelties) and collies; zincresponsive dermatosis occurs in Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes; and many of the
wire-coated terrier breeds (Scottish, Cairn, Sealyham, West Highland White, Irish, and
Welsh) seem to be particularly predisposed to allergiC skin disease. See Chapter 20 for a
review of breed predilections for cutaneous neoplasms.
In a study of dogs in northern California conducted at the University of California at
Davis, 31 breeds were found to be at elevated risk for skin diseases, including Doberman
pinscher, Irish setter, Dalmatian, Dachshund, Golden retriever, various terrier breeds,
Shar pei, Chow Chow, and Akita." In the same study, decreased risk of skin disease was
found for dogs of mixed breeding and for 12 purebred breeds, including St. Bernard,
standard Poodle, beagle, Basset hound, German shorthaired pointer, Afghan hound, and
Australian shepherd.

76 • Diagnostic Methods
• Tahle 2-2

SKIN DISEASE WITH FREQUENT AGE-RELATED
ONSET (STRONG CLINICAL IMPRESSION)
AGE

DISEASE

Younger than 6 months

Alopecia universalis
Black hair follicle dysplasia
Canine muzzle furunculosis
Cutaneous asthenia
Demodicosis
Dermatomyositis
Dermatophytosis
Ectodermal defect
Epidermolysis bullosa
Hypotrichosis
Ichthyosis
Impetigo
Juvenile cellulitis
Lymphedema
Other congenital hereditary defects
Pituitary dwarfism
Tyrosinemia
Viral papillomatosis (oral)
Allergic diseases, especially atopy
Adrenal hyperplasia syndrome
Color dilution alopecia
Hyposomatotropism in the mature dog
Primary idiopathic seborrhea
Cushing's disease
Feminization with testicular tumor
Neoplasms
Alopecia
Decubital ulcer
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Thin, fragile skin

1 to 3 years

Older than 6 years

Senile dogs

Sex
The sex of the patient affects the incidence of certain problems. Obviously, male feminization with testicular tumors occurs only in male animals. Other sex-related problems occur
(e.g., circumanal adenomas are seen almost exclusively in male dogs). In addition, sexrelated behaviors may affect the incidence of certain diseases, such as abscesses in fighting
tomcats. One should determine whether the patient is sexually intact; in intact females, it
should be determined whether the skin problem bears any relationship to the estrous
cycle.

Color
The color of an animal may also be related to certain problems-most notable is the
association of solar dermatitis and squamous cell carcinoma of the pinna in white-eared
cats. In addition, solar dermatitis, actinic keratoses, solar-related hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, and squamous cell carcinoma occur in white-skinned, thinly haired regions of
dogs, particularly in white bull terriers, Staffordshire bull terriers (pit bull terriers), boxers,
Dalmatians, beagles, Whippets, and Great Danes.
Coat color may also relate to disease, as in color dilution alopecia. Although it is most
commonly described in Doberman pinschers, this hair disorder occurs in any breed that
has diluted coat colors and may occur in piebald breeds as well. 16a The color of the eyes
and coat may be helpful in diagnosis, as in yellow-eyed, "smoky" Persian cats with the
Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Also, an association between positive intradermal skin test
results and coat colors was observed in normal cats.v
Text continued on page 82

Diagnostic Methods • 79
• Tahle 2-.1

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON·NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued

BREED

DISEASE

Gennan shepherd Continued

Erythema multiforrne
Familial vasculopathy
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Fly dermatitis of ear tips
Food hypersensitivity
Lupoid onychodystrophy
Insect- or arachnid-related eosinophilic furunculosis (face)
Medullary trichomalacia
Metatarsal fistulae
Mucocutaneous bacterial pyoderma
Nasal furunculosis, bacterial
Otitis extema
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pituitary dwarfism
Pythiosis
Seborrhea, primary
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vitiligo
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Atopy
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Juvenile cellulitis
Nasal hypopigmentation
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Trichoptilosis
Atopy
Hypothyroidism
Juvenile cellulitis
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Callus formation, hygroma
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Solar dermatosis in Harlequin
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Demodicosis
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Drug reactions
Vasculopathy
Cheyletiellosis
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum canis)
Idiopathic facial dermatitis
Primary seborrhea
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Atopy
Acral lick dermatitis
Color dilution alopecia
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Granulocytopathy
Hypothyroidism
Seborrhea, primary
Follicular dysplasia
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Elbow hygroma
Hypothyroidism
Table continued on following page

Golden retriever

Gordon setter

Great Dane

Great Pyrenees
Greyhound
Himalayan cat

Irish setter

Irish water spaniel
Irish wolfhound

80 • Diagnostic Methods
• Tahle 2-:3

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON·NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued

BREED

DISEASE

Keeshond

Adrenal hyperplasia syndrome
Hypogonadism of intact male
Hyposomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Atopy
Familial nasal hyperkeratosis
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Waterline disease (Malassezia dermatitis?)
Atopy
Injection reaction
Malassezia dermatitis
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hypothyroidism
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Atopy
Demodicosis
Drug reactions
Pedal furunculosis, bacterial
Facial fold intertrigo
Injection reactions
Sertoli cell syndrome
Cheyletiellosis
Dermatophytosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Hair mats
Idiopathic facial dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Acral mutilation
Demodicosis
Epidermolysis bullosa
Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Nasal and muzzle folliculitis
Adrenal sex hormone abnormalities
Hyposomatotropism
Injection reactions
Ectodermal defect
Epiphora
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyposomatotropism
Hypothyroidism
Injection reactions
Otitis extema
Sebaceous adenitis (standard)
Follicular dysplasia
Atopy
Facial fold and tail fold intertrigo
Hypotrichosis
Dermoid sinus in midline of back
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Follicular lipidosis
Follicular parakeratosis
Idiopathic vasculitis
Vitiligo

Labrador retriever

Lhasa apso
Malamute

Newfoundland

Old English sheepdog

Pekingese

Persian cat

Pointers

Pomeranians
Poodle

Portuguese water dog
Pug
Rex cat
Rhodesian Ridgeback
Rottweiler

Diagnostic Methods • 81
• Tahle 2-3

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON·NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued

BREED

DISEASE

Samoyed

Adrenal hyperplasia syndrome
Hyposomatotropism
Sebaceous adenitis
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Pemphigus foliaceus
Atopy
Demodicosis
Fold intertrigo
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic mucinosis
IgA deficiency
Atopy
Aurotrichia
Drug reactions
Follicular dysplasia (flank)
Hypothyroidism
Pseudohermaphroditism
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
Subcorneal pustular dematosis
Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis
Dermatomyositis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Drug reactions
Folliculitis, bacterial
Sertoli cell syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Atopy
Malassezia dermatitis
Food hypersensitivity
Hypotrichosis
Periocular leukotrichia
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia
Vitiligo
Discoid lupus erythematosus
EOSinophilic granuloma
Follicular dysplasia
Hypogonadism in intact male
Idiopathic onychodystrophy
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Acral mutilation (English Springer)
Atopy (American Cocker)
Cutaneous asthenia (English Springer)
Food hypersensitivity
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic onychodystrophy (Springer)
Lip fold intertrigo
Malassezia dermatitis
Otitis externa (especially proliferative)
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis (English Springer)
Seborrhea, primary
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis (Cocker)
Acral lick dermatitis
Follicultis and furunculosis, bacterial
Pyotraumatic dermatitis

Schipperke
Shar pei

Schnauzer, miniature

Shetland sheepdog

Shih tzu
Siamese cat

Siberian husky

Spaniels (Cocker and Springer)

St. Bernard

Terriers
Cairn
Irish

Atopy, Sertoli cell syndrome
Hereditary footpad hyperkeratosis
Table continued on folloWing page

82 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2-3

BREED PREDILECTION FOR NON-NEOPLASTIC
SKIN DISEASES (STRONG CLINICAL
IMPRESSION) Continued

BREED
Jack Russell

Kerry blue

Scottish

West Highland white

Wire-haired fox
Yorkshire

Vizsla
Weimeraner

Whippet

DISEASE
Atopy
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis (Trichophyton mentagrophytes, var. erinacei)
Vasculitis
Footpad keratoses (corns)
Otitis extema
Spiculosis
Atopy
Demodicosis
Folliculitis and furunculosis, bacterial
Hereditary nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis
Atopy
Demodicosis
Epidermal dysplasia
Ichthyosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Seborrhea, primary
Atopy
Color dilution alopecia
Dermatophytosis (M. canis)
Injection reactions
Melanoderma and alopecia
Traction alopecia
Sebaceous adenitis
Demodicosis
Muzzle furunculosis
Sertoli cell syndrome
Sterile pyogranuIoma syndrome
Idiopathic onychodystrophy

Medical History
The clinician should obtain a complete medical history in all cases." In practice, two levels
of history are taken. The first level includes those questions that are always asked, and this
level is often helped by having the client fill out a history questionnaire before the
examination (see Fig. 2-2). Often, the answers on these forms will change if the client is
questioned directly, so these form answers should be reviewed and not relied on as
initially answered. The first level should initially include questions about previous illnesses
and problems. The second level in history taking relates to more specific questions that
relate to specific diseases. These more pertinent questions are usually asked once the
practitioner has examined the animal and is developing a differential diagnosis or has at
least established what some of the problems are. However, it is vital to use a systematic,
detailed method of examination and history taking so that important information is not
overlooked. A complete history takes a lot of time to obtain and usually is a major
component of the initial examination period. In practice, most practitioners do not take
the time to collect a thorough history for the problem. Learning which historical questions
are most important for specific problems and being certain to collect this information
becomes critical. For example, the number of normal bowel movements per day is helpful
if assessing the possibility of food hypersensitivity and is an important question to ask in
perennially pruritic dogs but not for dogs with nonpruritic, endocrine appearing alopecia.
Often, the history is completed during the examination and once the initial differential
diagnosis is determined.
The clinician who can draw out a complete history in an unbiased form has a valuable
skill. It is important that the questions presented to the client do not suggest answers or

Diagnostic Methods • 83

tend to shut off discussion. Some owners purposely or unconsciously withhold pertinent
facts, especially about neglect, diet, previous medication, or other procedures they think
may not be well received by the examining veterinarian. Other pertinent information may
be left out because some owners are not aware of what is normal. They may not know
how much licking or chewing it takes to consider a dog's behavior abnormal. Therefore,
they may not supply valuable information because they do not perceive the information to
be significant or abnormal. In other cases, they may recognize something as abnormal but
attribute the observation to some other, unrelated cause (e.g., paw licking that the client
interprets as behavior to obtain attention and does not list as a problem in the history).
The clinician must become skillful at extracting all the relevant history and observations, regardless of the client's perception of their importance. The skillful clinician is ever
tuned to listen for side comments by the client or by the children. These may be veritable
"pearls" of information in a mass of trivia. They also help to establish the client's accuracy
and credibility.
Next, the following information about the skin lesions should be obtained from the
owner: the date and age at onset, the original locations, the initial appearance, the
tendency to progression or regression, factors affecting the course,' and previous treatment
(home, proprietary, or pet shop remedies used, as well as veterinary treatment). In
addition, treatments of other problems should be determined and recorded. The relationships between all treatments and the onset of or changes in the disease should be
recorded and a possible drug reaction considered. Drug reactions are diagnosed only
when they are suspected, and because they may mimic any disease, the history aids in
arriving at this diagnosis,
Almost all animals with skin disorders have been bathed, dipped, sprayed, or treated
with one or more medications, and the owner may be reluctant or unable to disclose a
complete list of previous treatments. It is important that the types of medication and the
dates of application are completely divulged, because a modification of pertinent signs
may have resulted.
Although the patient cannot relate subjective findings (symptoms such as itching,
burning sensation, and pain), it is possible to determine the degree of pruritus reasonably
well. The presence and severity of pain may also be evaluated in some cases by the
patient's response to stimuli: Exhibiting shyness, pulling away, exhibiting skin twitching,
and responding with aggressiveness may be manifested when pain is provoked.
Pruritus is one of the most common presenting complaints and, in many cases, is a
hallmark of allergy. The presence, location, and degree of itching are important criteria in
the differential diagnosis of many skin diseases. The owner's idea of the intensity of
itching, however, may vary considerably from that of the veterinarian. Consequently, it is
helpful to ask questions, "How many times daily do you see your dog scratch?" "Does it
itch in many sites, or just a few?" "Does it shake its head?" "Does it lick its paws?" "Does
it lick the front legs or other areas?" "Does it roll on its back or rub its chin, ears, or body
against things?" It is often helpful to have the client initially grade the itching on a scale
of 1 to 10, because many diseases associated with pruritus are chronic. The range is
categorized as follows: Zero is no itching at all, 1 being very mild, and 10 as bad as the
pet has ever itched. This level can be recorded and asked again as therapies or diagnostic
procedures are tried to help determine how the pet's problem changes over time. Also, by
having the answers to the previous questions asked about the pruritus, there is a record of
how severe the problem is and the symptoms seen when the owner indicates a level of
itching. Over time, the client's perceptions may change, and this approach allows that
change to be determined and documented. It is also very helpful to determine, when
possible, whether the pruritus involves initially normal-appearing skin (an itch that rashes,
typical of allergy), or whether skin lesions precede or appear at the same time as the
pruritus (a rash that itches).
Many times, owners disassociate other problems that their pet is having. For example,
a dog is presented for paw licking and groin pruritus. The dog has also had multiple ear
infections during the past few years but has only recently had pruritus of the paws and

84 • Diagnostic Methods
groin. The owners may not mention the ear problems, the itching, or treatments for the
ears unless they are specifically asked about them because they assume it is not important
or it is an unrelated problem.
The same types of specific questions are helpful when discussing diets, because the
owner often states the typical feedings and leaves out treats and supplements. A more
representative answer is often secured if one asks, "What did your pet eat yesterday, or
during the past 48 hours?" Also: "What treats does your pet receive and what supplements
do you add to its diet?" Specifically, the clinician asks whether any vitamins or flavored
chewable medications are given. The clinician also asks about rawhide chew toys or other
edible toys.
Because contact irritants or allergens are important contributors to or causes of skin
disease, it is necessary to inquire about the animal's environment. Does it live in an
apartment or is it outdoors in the fields and forests? Does it sleep in a doghouse or in the
owner's house? If it sleeps in the house, in what room does it sleep and is there
carpeting? If it sleeps in a person's bedroom, does it sleep on the floor or on the bed?
Are there feather pillows or comforters or wool blankets? If the pet sleeps in a doghouse,
in a garage, or outside, does the bedding consist of straw, wool blankets, or some other
material? Are symptoms worse when the pet first awakens, sometimes suggesting exposure
throughout the night?
If the pet is boarded or hospitalized, do the symptoms improve? If the pet travels, do
the symptoms improve while traveling or while in other homes? Symptoms that resolve in
a different environment are highly suggestive of a reaction to an environmental allergen or
irritant. Questions regarding sexual behavior may also reveal important information, particularly when endocrine disorders are suspected. Other more organ-specific questions may
also be asked, depending on the clinical suspicions of possible diseases. Questions regarding changes in water consumption, appetite, weight, and urination or defecation habits
should be included in history taking.
In determining contagion, one should inquire about the skin health of other animals
on the premises. The presence of skin disease in the people living with the patient may
also be highly significant in some disorders (scabies, cheyletiellosis, and dermatophytosis).
At this point, the clinician usually has a general idea of the problem and is ready to
proceed with a careful physical examination. In some cases, the clinician may want to
come back to the medical history if further examinations indicate a more serious or
underlying systemic disease .

• PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
General Observations
A good examination necessitates adequate lighting. Normal daylight without glare is best,
but any artificial light of adequate candlepower is sufficient if it produces bright, noncolor-changing, uniform lighting. The lamp should be adjustable to illuminate all body
areas. A combination loupe and light provides magnification of the field as well as good
illumination.
Before the clinician concentrates on the individual lesions, the entire animal should
always be observed from a distance of a couple of meters to obtain a general impression
of abnormalities and to observe distribution patterns.
Does the pet appear to be in good health? Is it fat or thin, unkempt or well
groomed? Is the problem generalized or localized? What is the distribution and configuration of the lesions? Are they bilaterally symmetric or unilaterally irregular (Fig. 2-3)? Is
the hair coat shiny or dull, and if it is dull, what is the pattern of those changes? Is it an
appropriate color and pattern of colors for its breed? Are coat changes in quality or color
lifelong, or did they develop before or after the symptoms for which the pet is presented?
To answer some of these questions, the clinician must examine the patient more
closely. The dorsal aspect of the body should be inspected by viewing it from the rear, as

Diagnostic Methods • 85

FIGURE 2-3. A, When a line is drawn from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail and the distribution of the lesions
is relatively the same on the right and left sides, the pattern is called bilaterally symmetric. Most such skin disorders have
an internal cause, and the skin reflects internal disease. Examples are hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, Sertoli's cell
tumor, and autoimmune diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus. Allergies may also present symmetric lesions. B, When a line
is drawn from the tip of the nose to the end of the tail and the lesions on one side are not identical to those on the other
side, the distribution pattern is asymmetric. External environmental causes, such as ectoparasites, fungi, or contact allergens,
are examples of disorders that cause asymmetric lesions.

elevated hairs and patchy alopecia may be more obvious from that angle. Then, the head,
the lateral trunk, and the extremities should be observed. Next, the clinician should
complete a thorough dermatologic examination.

Dermatologic Examination
After an impression is obtained from a distance, the skin should be examined more closely
and palpated.' It is important to examine every centimeter of skin and visible mucous
membranes. Many subtle clues are located where the client is unaware of problems. The
authors have seen many cases in which ventrally located lesions and interdigital, paronychial, and oral lesions went unobserved by a veterinarian. These lesions may add valuable
diagnostic information. It is difficult to complete a dermatologic examination without
rolling animals on their sides or back. All the paws must be picked up or handled so that
the ventral interdigital skin is also examined.
Many observations need to be made. What is the texture of the hair? Is it coarse or
fine, dry or Oily? Does it epilate easily? A change in the amount of hair is often a
dramatic finding, although subtle thinning of the hair coat should also be noted. Alopecia
is a partial or complete lack of hair in areas where it is normally present. Hypotrichosis
implies partial hair loss and is a form of alopecia. Is the thinning diffuse, or are there
numerous small focal areas of alopecia (the latter being often seen with folliculitis)?
Hypertrichosis is excessive hair, and although the condition is rare in animals, it usually
has hormonal or developmental causes.
The texture, elasticity, and thickness of the skin should be determined and impressions of heat or coolness recorded. It is easier to find skin lesions in some breeds than in
others, depending on the thickness of the coat. Additionally, there is variation in an
animal's coat density in different body areas, with skin lesions often being discerned more

86 • Diagnostic Methods
readily in sparsely haired regions. Therefore, the clinician must part or clip the hair in
heavily haired areas to observe and palpate lesions that are present but obscured.
When abnormalities are discovered, it is important to establish their morphologic
features, configuration, and general distribution. The clinician should try to appreciate the
different lesions and their patterns. Together, they often represent the natural history of
the skin disease.
/

Morphology of Skin Lesions
The morphologic characteristics of skin lesions, together with their history, are an essential
feature of dermatologic diagnosis. I. 3 Morphologic features and the medical and dermatologic history are often the only guidelines if laboratory procedures cannot be performed or
do not yield useful information. The clinician must learn to recognize primary and
secondary lesions. A primary lesion is the initial eruption that develops spontaneously as a
direct reflection of underlying disease. Secondary lesions evolve from primary lesions or
are artifacts induced by the patients or by external factors such as trauma and medications. Primary lesions (pustules, vesicles, papules) may appear quickly and then disappear
rapidly. However, they may leave behind secondary lesions (such as focal alopecia, epidermal collarettes, scaling, hyperpigmentation, and crusts), which may be more chronic and
give clues about the presence of previous primary lesions. Therefore, the identification
and the characterization of both primary and secondary lesions are important.
Careful inspection of the diseased skin frequently reveals a primary lesion, which may
suggest a limited differential diagnosis, For example, pustules most commonly represent a
bacterial pyoderma, whereas sterile pustular diseases occur infrequently. Close inspection
of primary lesions may also reveal elusive differences. In assessing the subtle morphologic
features of lesions, the clinician may find it helpful to focus on individual lesions and
examine them minutely with good light and a hand-held lens or a head loupe with 4- to
6-power magnification. This may allow better identification (e.g., whether pustules are
follicular or nonfollicular).
A primary lesion may vary slightly from its initial appearance to its full development.
Later, through regression, degeneration, or traumatization, it may change in form and
become a secondary lesion. Although classic descriptions and textbooks refer to lesions as
primary or secondary, some lesions can be either (e.g., alopecia can be primary [from
endocrine disorders] or secondary [from chewing because of pruritus]). Follicular casts,
scales, pigment changes, crusts, and comedones may also be primary or secondary. In
some conditions, such as primary seborrhea and zinc-responsive dermatosis with secondary
bacterial pyoderma, crusts may appear in the same animal as both primary and secondary
lesions.
Secondary lesions may also be informative. A ring of orthokeratotic scaling usually
follows a point source of inflammation, either a papule or a pustule. This is also true of
small focal circular areas of alopecia. Hyperpigmentation that has a lattice-like or lacelike
configuration generally reflects an area of previous inflammation such as erythematous
macules, papules, and pustules. Yellow- to honey-colored crusts usually follow the rupture
and drying of pustules. In many cases, however, the significant lesion must be differentiated from the mass of secondary debris. Variations of lesions and their configurations are
common, because early and advanced stages coexist in most skin diseases. The ability to
discover a characteristic lesion and understand its significance is an important aspect of
mastering dermatologic diagnoses.
The following illustrations can help the clinician identify primary and secondary
lesions. Also, the character of the lesions may vary, implying a different pathogenesis or
cause. The definitions and examples in Figures 2-4 to 2-24 explain the relationship of
skin lesions to canine and feline dermatoses.
• Primary lesions
Macule or patch (Fig. 2-4)
Papule orcplaque (Fig. 2-5)

Diagnostic Methods • 87

FIGURE 2-4. Macule-a circumscribed, nonpalpable spot up to 1 cm in diameter and
characterized by a change in the color of the skin. Patch-a macule larger than 1 cm in size.
The discoloration can result from several processes: an increase in melanin pigmentation,
depigmentation, and erythema or local hemorrhage. Examples are the hyperpigmentation
patches in endocrine or postinHammatory hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation, and vitiligo.
Discoloration also occurs after inHammation of the erythematous macules in many types of
acute dermatitis, lentigo, and pigmented nevi. (The photograph illustrates lentigo.) Types of
macules are as follows: purpura-bleeding into the skin (these are usually dark red but change
to purple as absorption proceeds); petechiae-pinpoint macules that are much smaller than 1
ern in diameter and are caused by hemorrhage; and ecchymoses-patches larger than 1 cm in
diameter that are caused by hemorrhage.

Pustule (Fig. 2-6)
Vesicle or bulla (Fig. 2-7)
Wheal (Fig. 2-8)
Nodule (Fig. 2-9)
Tumor or cyst (Fig. 2-10)
• Lesions that may be primary or secondary
Alopecia (Fig. 2-11)
Scale (Fig. 2-12)
Crust (Fig. 2-13)
Follicular casts (Fig. 2 -14)
Comedo (Fig. 2-15)
Pigmentary abnormalities (Figs. 2-16 and 2-17)
• Secondary lesions
Epidermal collarette (Fig. 2-18)
Scar (Fig. 2-19)
Excoriation (Fig. 2-20)
Erosion or ulcer (Fig. 2-21)
Fissure (Fig. 2-22)
Lichenification (Fig. 2-23)
Callus (Fig. 2-24)
Two special techniques of close examination of the skin, although infrequently used,
are noteworthy:

88 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-5. Papule-a small, solid elevation of the skin up to 1 ern in diameter that can
always be palpated as a solid mass. Many papules are pink or red swellings produced by tissue
infiltration of inflammatory cells in tbe dermis, by intraepidermal and subepidermal edema, or
by epidermal hypertrophy. They mayor may not involve hair follicles. Examples are the
erythematous papules seen in scabies and flea bite hypersensitivity. In the dog, another common cause of papules is superficial bacterial folliculitis. (Photograph illustrates contact hypersensitivity.) Plaque-a larger, flat-topped elevation formed by the extension or coalition of
papules. A plaque that is made up of closely packed, projecting elevations often covered by
crusts is called a vegetation.

1. Diascopy is performed by pressing a clear piece of plastic or glass over an erythematous lesion. If the lesion blanches on pressure, the reddish color is due to
vascular engorgement. If it does not, there is hemorrhage into the skin (petechia
or ecchymosis) (Fig. 2-25A and B).
2. Nikolsky's sign is elicited by applying pressure on a vesicle or at the edge of an
ulcer or erosion or even on normal skin. IRa It is positive when the outer layer of
the skin is easily rubbed off or pushed away. It indicates poor cellular cohesion, as
found in the pemphigus complex, toxic epidermal necrolysis (Fig. 2-26), and
erythema multiforme major.

Configuration of Lesions
The configuration of skin lesions may be helpful in establishing a differential diagnosis
(Fig. 2-27).3 Some diseases often have lesions present in certain configurations, and
although exceptions exist, recognizing the pattern of lesions adds information for decision
making. Lesions may be single, such as the solitary dermatophytosis lesion and a foreignbody reaction. Multiple lesions are most commonly seen in skin diseases of dogs and cats.
When lesions are linear, external forces such as scratching, being scratched by something, and having something applied to the skin are often responsible. In other cases,
linear lesions may reflect the involvement of a blood or lymphatic vessel, a dermatome, or
a congenital malformation. Diffuse areas of involvement tend to suggest a metabolic or
systemic reaction, such as endocrine disorders, keratinization, and immunologic or hypersensitivity disorders. Annular lesions are often associated with peripheral spreading of a
disease. Common examples of annular lesions are superficial spreading bacterial folliculitis

Diagnostic Methods • 89

FIGURE 2-6. Pustule-a small, circumscribed elevation of the epidermis that is filled with
pus. Pustules may be intraepidermal, subepidermal, or follicular in location. Their color is
usually yellow but may be green or red. Most commonly, pustules primarily contain neutrophils
and are infectious in origin; however, eosinophils may predominate (especially in parasitic or
allergic disorders) and may be sterile (subcomeal pustular dermatosis, pemphigus foliaceus,
sterile eosinophilic pustulosis). Size and color may be clues to the cause of the condition.
Larger flaccid pustules (bullous impetigo) are more often associated with Cushing's disease,
iatrogenic Cushing's disease, immune-suppressed cases, or pemphigus foliaceus. Larger green
pustules imply gram-negative infections or marked toxic changes. Examples are acne, folliculitis,
and the pustules found on the abdomen of puppies with impetigo. (Photograph illustrates
nonfollicular pustules from subcomeal pustular dermatosis.) Abscess-a demarcated fluctuant
lesion resulting from a dermal or subcutaneous accumulation of pus. The pus is not visible on
the surface of the skin until it drains to the surface. Abscesses are larger and deeper than
pustules.

and dermatophytosis. Coalescing lesions occur when multiple lesions are present and
spread so that they overlap.

Different Stages
A skin disease and its individual lesions progress from its earliest appearance to a fully
developed state and, in many cases, to a chronic or resolved stage. The distribution, the
configuration, and the histologic appearance of lesions change. The evolution of lesions
should be determined either by obtaining the history or by finding different stages of
lesions on the patient. Papules often develop into vesicles and pustules, which may
rupture to leave erosions or ulcers and finally crusts. An understanding of these progressions helps in the diagnostic process.
As lesions develop in specific patterns, they also involute in characteristic ways. The
lesions change, along with their histologic appearance. For example, a macule may develop into a pustule and then a crust or crusted erosion. It may then spread peripherally,
occurring as a ring of lesions; the lesion then appears as a circular patch with multiple
pustules or crusts on the margins and central alopecia. The fully developed lesions could
appear as a large alopecic patch with a central area of hyperpigmentation and multifocal
erythematous macules, pustules, or crusts intermittently along the leading margin; this
lesion could then appear arciform. Scaling may also occur at the leading margins of

90 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-7. Vesicle-a sharply circumscribed elevation of the epidermis filled with clear
fluid. It can be intraepidermal or subepidermal. Vesicles are rarely seen in dogs and cats
because they are fragile and transient. They occur in viral or autoimmune dermatoses, or in
dermatitis caused by irritants. Vesicles are lesions up to 1 cm in diameter; those with a
diameter greater than 1 em are called bullae. (Photograph illustrates several vesicles caused by
a chemical irritant.)

inflammation. The healing phase of a chronic lesion may appear as a patch of alopecia and
hyperpigmentation with no other primary or secondary lesions because they have spontaneously resolved or responded to therapy.
Because diseases and their lesions are evolutionary, the clinician must attempt to
learn about all of the stages. The recognition of the different stages as well as the lesions
becomes important when selecting areas to sample for diagnostic tests.

Distribution Patterns of Skin Lesions
The areas of skin involved with lesions or affected by symptoms of the disease help in
determining the differential diagnosis because most skin diseases have a typical distribution.? It is important to emphasize that the accurate determination of the distribution
necessitates detection of all changes in the haircoat or the skin, the location of symptoms
related to the disease, and the location of all primary and secondary lesions. An adequate
determination of the distribution pattern can be achieved only by a thorough history and
dermatologic examination; cursory examinations are often incomplete.
The study of skin diseases involves understanding the primary lesions that occur as
well as the typical distribution patterns. Diseases less commonly present with atypical
patterns. The combination of the type of lesions present and their distribution is the basis
for developing a differential diagnosis. The distribution pattern may be very helpful by
allowing clinicians to establish the differential diagnosis based on the region involved when
animals have lesions and symptoms confined to certain regions (Table 2-4). In some
instances, this regional pattern is such a major feature that it is a required aspect of the
disease. The best examples are otitis externa, pododermatitis, and nasal dermatitis. Actually, these terms refer to skin disease of a specific region, give little more information, and
certainly are not specific diagnoses.

Diagnostic Methods • 91

FIGURE 2-8. Wheal-a sharply circumscribed, raised lesion consisting of edema that
usually appears and disappears within minutes or hours. Wheals usually produce no changes
in the appearance of the overlying skin and haircoat. Wheals are characteristically white to
pink elevated ridges or round edematous swellings that only rarely have pseudopods at their
periphery. They blanch on diascopy (viewing the skin through a glass slide that is pressed
firmly against the lesion). A huge hive of a distensible region such as the lips or eyelids is
called angioedema. Examples of wheals are urticaria, insect bites, and positive reactions to
allergy skin tests. (Photograph illustrates urticaria.)

FIGURE 2-9. Nodule-a circumscribed, solid elevation greater than 1 ern in diameter
that usually extends into the deeper layers of the skin. Nodules usually result from massive
infiltration of inflammatory or neoplastic cells into the dermis or subcutis. Deposition of fibrin
or crystalline material also produces nodules. (Photograph illustrates panniculitis.)

92 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-10. Tumor-a large mass that may involve any structure of the skin or
subcutaneous tissue. Most tumors are neoplastic or granulomatous in origin. (Photograph
illustrates pilomatrixoma.) Cyst-an epithelium-lined cavity containing fluid or a solid material. It is a smooth, well-circumscribed, fluctuant to solid mass. Skin cysts are usually lined by
adnexal epithelium (hair follicle, sebaceous, or epitrichial) and filled with cornified cellular
debris or sebaceous or epitrichial secretions.

FIGURE 2-11. Alopecia is loss of hair and may vary from partial to complete. It may be primary,
such as alopecia with endocrine disorders and follicular dysplasias, or it can occur secondary to trauma
or inflammation. (Photograph illustrates alopecia from an injection reaction.)

Diagnostic Methods • 93

FIGURE 2-12. Scale-an accumulation of loose fragments of the horny layer of the skin
(cornified cells). The corneocyte is the final product of epidermal keratinization. Normal loss
occurs as individual cells or small clusters not visible to the naked eye. Abnormal scaling is
the loss in larger flakes. Flakes vary greatly in consistency; they can appear branny, fine,
powdery, flaky, platelike, greasy, dry, loose, adhering, or nitlike. The color varies from white,
silver, yellow, or brown to gray. (Photograph illustrates seborrhea.) Scales may be the primary
lesions in some cases of color dilution alopecia, follicular dysplasia, primary idiopathic seborrhea, and ichthyosis. They are common secondary lesions in chronic inflammation.

Table 2-4 lists areas or parts of the body along with the common skin diseases that
are most frequently localized or especially severe in those areas. The chart is useful in the
differential diagnosis. However, the clinician must also be aware that other diseases may
occur in these regions and that diseases that often affect a certain region can also occur
elsewhere and not involve the typical region. Therefore, regional evaluations aid in ranking
differential diagnostic possibilities: they do not determine the diagnosts.
In many instances, the patterning that skin diseases take is unexplained. Recently,
hom eobox genes have received much attention.l'" These genes are a family of regulatory
proteins that influence pattern formation at many levels and may be fundamental to the
development of the many patterns used to diagnose skin diseases.

Differential Diagnosis
A differential diagnosis is developed on the basis of a compilation of the preceding
information. The possible diagnoses should be considered in their proposed likely order of
occurrence. This point is important as the first step in developing a cost-effective plan.

Developing a Diagnostic or Therapeutic Plan
Laboratory tests or therapies can be recommended on the basis of tentative diagnosis and
differential diagnosis. If a strong tentative diagnosis is not determined from the history
and the physical examination, the approach should be directed at the two or three most
likely diagnoses. Client-veterinarian interaction is critical at this point. The client decides
what is going to be done, but his or her decision is based on the clinician's recommendations. Therefore, the client needs to know the tentative or possible diagnoses, as well as
expected costs and anticipated results of the diagnostic or therapeutic options proposed.
Diagnostic tests and laboratory procedures are useful whenever a definitive diagnosts

94 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-13. Crust is formed when dried exudate, serum, pus, blood, cells, scales, or
medications adhere to the surface. Unusually thick crusts are found in hairy areas because the
dried material tends to adhere more tightly than in glabrous skin. Crust may be primary as in
primary seborrhea and zinc-responsive dermatosis, or secondary as in pyoderma, fly strike, or
pruritus. Hemorrhagic crusts in pyoderma are brown or dark red; yellowish green crusts
appear in some cases of pyoderma; tan, lightly adhering crusts are found in impetigo. Vegetations-c-heaped-up crusts seen ill pemphigus vegetans. (Photograph illustrates nasal Iurunculosis.) Dark crusts imply deeper tissue damage or hemorrhage and may be seen more with
traumatic wounds, furunculosis, fly strike dermatitis, and vasculitis. Honey-colored crusts are
more commonly infectious in nature; thicker dry yellow crusts are more typical of scabies and
zinc-responsive dermatosis, Tightly adherent crusts are typical in zinc-responsive dermatosis
and necrolytic migratory erythema, and they also occur in some cases of seborrhea.

cannot be made from the case history and clinical examination alone.' Laboratory procedures may confirm many clinical diagnoses and provide a logical basis for successful
therapeutic management. They should be recommended on the basis of the most likely
diagnosis and should not be randomly suggested or recommended just to be comprehensive. The cost effectiveness of each test should also be considered. In practice, it is often
unacceptable to recommend numerous tests to screen for the long list of possible diagnoses in any given case. Instead, the results of recommended tests should confirm or rule
out the diagnoses that the clinician deems most likely.

• LABORATORY PROCEDURES
Surface Sampling
The lesions and pathologic changes of a skin disease are often readily available for study,
and a variety of laboratory tests are based on this easy access to the skin's surface. A great
deal of information may be obtained by studying microscopically materials collected from
the hair and skin. Skin scraping, obtaining an acetate tape impresston, and flea combing
are all techniques to find microscopic ectoparasites. Hairs may be removed, and exudates
may be collected and examined microscopically. Most of these techniques may be done in
general clinical practice and rapidly add valuable information to a case work-up. However,
practice and study may be necessary to maximize the benefits of many tests. The effort to
Text continued on page 101

Diagnostic Methods • 9S

FIGURE 2-14. Follicular castan accumulation of keratin and follicular material that adheres to the
hair shaft extending above the surface of the follicular ostia. It is a
primary lesion in vitamin A-responsive dermatoses, primary seborrhea,
and sebaceous adenitis. (Photograph
illustrates hair epilated from a dog
with sebaceous adenitis; the clumps
of material at the base of multiple
hairs are the casts.) Follicular casts
may be secondary lesions in demodectic mange and dermatophytosis.

FIGURE 2-15. Comedo-a dilated hair follicle filled
with cornified cells and sebaceous material. It is the initial lesion of feline acne and may predispose the skin to
bacterial folliculitis. A comedo may be produced secondaI)' to seborrheic skin disease, to occlusion with greasy
medications, or to the administration of systemic or topical corticosteroids. (Photograph illustrates comedones of
the skin on the tail of a dog.) When comedones are
present, diseases of the hair follicle should be considered
such as infection with Demodex and dermatophytosis.
Comedones may be primary lesions in feline acne, vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, Schnauzer comedo syndrome, Cushing's disease, sex hormone dermatoses, and
some idiopathic seborrhea disorders.

96 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-16. Abnormal pigmentation-skin coloration caused by a variety of
pigments but most commonly melanin, which is responsible for many skin colors:
black-melanin present throughout the epidermis (lentigo); hlue-melanin within
melanocytes and melanophages in the middle and deep dermis (dermal melanocytoma). gray-diffuse dermal melanosis or superficial dermal melanosis from pigment incontinence; tan, brown, black-various shades of normal skin color in
breeds are due to melanin; brown-hemochromatosis is due primarily to melanin,
not hemosiderin. Other pigments are as follows: red, purple-hemorrhage in the
skin is red at first, becoming dark purple with time (bruises), yellow-greenaccumulations of bile pigments (icterus). In hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis),
loss of epidermal melanin may be primary, as with vitiligo-like disease, or secondary, as in postinHammatory change. (Photograph demonstrates Rottweiler with
leukoderma and leukotrichia.) Leukoderma is a general term for white skin,
whereas vitiligo refers to a specific disease. Lack of pigment in hair is called
leukotrichia or achromotrichia.

FIGURE 2-17. Hyperpigmentation
(hypermelanosis,
melanodermal-increased epidermal and,
occasionally, dermal melanin. Melanophages may be found in the superficial dermis.
(PostinHammatory,
chronic, traumatic, and endocrine
skin lesions.) Excess pigment in hair
is called melanotrichia. (Photograph
illustrates postinHammatory hyperpigmentation.) The pattern of hyperpigmentation is helpful in determining the etiology. Endocrine
hyperpigmentation tends to be diffuse, whereas postinHammatory hyperpigmentation has a latticework
appearance.

Diagnostic Methods • 97

FIGURE 2- 18. Epidermal collarette-a special type of scale arranged in a circular rim
of loose keratin flakes or peeling keratin. It represents the remnants of the roof of a vesicle,
bulla, pustule, or papule, or the hyperkeratosis caused by a point source of inflammation as
seen with papules and pustules. (Photograph illustrates a healing pustule of staphylococcal
folliculitis.)

FIGURE 2-19. Scar-an area of fibrous tissue that has replaced the damaged dermis or
subcutaneous tissue. Scars are the remnants of trauma or dermatologic lesions. Most scars in
dogs and cats are alopecic, atrophic, and depigmented. Proliferative scars do occur, and in darkskinned dogs scars can be alopecic and hyperpigmented. Scars are observed following severe
bums and in deep pyoderma. (Photograph illustrates bum scarring.)

98 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-20. Excoriation-erosions or ulcers caused by scratching, biting, or rubbing.
Excoriations are self-produced and usually result from pruritus; they invite secondary bacterial
infection. They are often partly recognized by their linear pattern. (Photograph illustrates
linear excoriations on the side of a dog with scabies.)

FIGURE 2-21. Erosion-a shallow epidermal defect that does not penetrate the basal laminar zone
and consequently heals without scarring; it generally
results from epidermal diseases and self-inflicted
trauma. Ulcer-there is a break in the continuity of
the epidermis, with exposure of the underlying dermis. A deep pathologic process is required for an
ulcer to form. It is important to note the structure of
the edge: Is it undermined, fibrotic and thickened,
or necrotic (vasculitis, neoplastic, fibrosing, vascular)?
The finnness of the ulcer depth and the type of
exudate in the crater should also be noted. A scar is
often left after an ulcer heals. Examples are feline
indolent ulcer, severe deep pyoderma, and vasculitis.
(Photograph illustrates vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus in a shelty.)

Diagnostic Methods • 99

FIGURE 2-22. Fissure-a linear cleavage into the epidermis, or
through the epidermis into the
dermis, caused by disease or injury. Fissures may be single or
multiple tiny cracks or large clefts
several centimeters long. They
have sharply defined margins and
may be dry or moist and straight,
curved, or branching. They occur
when the skin is thick and inelastic
and then subjected to sudden
swelling from inflammation or
trauma, especially in regions of frequent movement. Examples are
found at ear margins, and at ocular, nasal, oral, and anal mucocutaneous borders. (Photograph illustrates two fissures in a footpad.)

FIGURE 2-23. Lichenification-a thickening and hardening of the skin characterized by
an exaggeration of the superficial skin markings. Lichenification areas often result from
friction. They may be normally colored but are more often hyperpigmented. Crusted
lichenified plaques usually have a bacterial component and improve with antibiotic therapy.
Occasionally, Malassezia are found with these lesions. Examples are the axillae in acanthosis
nigricans. (Photograph illustrates the axilla of a dog with chronic atopic dermatitis. The
lichenification here is a result of rubbing.)

I00 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-24. Callus-a thickened, rough, hyperkeratotic, alopecic, often lichenified
plaque that develops on the skin. Most commonly, calluses occur over bony prominences and
result from pressure and chronic low-grade friction. (Photograph illustrates an elbow callus.)

FIGURE 2-25. A, Abdomen of dog with druginduced vasculitis and purpura. B, Erythema fails
to blanch with diascopy, confirming dermal hemorrhage.

Diagnostic Methods • 101

FIGURE 2-26. Photograph illustrates a case
of toxic epidermal necrolysis (drug-induced)
and the presence of Nikolsky's sign.

learn these techniques is well worth the time. The alternatives are not to obtain this
information, to do other more expensive and time-consuming tests, or to send samples to
a laboratory, which adds cost and time delays.
SKIN SCRAPING

Skin scraping is one of the most frequently used tests in veterinary dermatology and is
recommended anytime the differential diagnosis includes microscopic ectoparasitic diseases. Its purpose is to enable the clinician to find and to identify small and microscopic
ectoparasites. It is important to realize that, although testing may accurately confirm
diseases, its sensitivity for ruling out a diagnosis depends on the disease and the aggressiveness of sampling. Skin scraping is most commonly used to verify or rule out the
diagnosis of demodectic mange. It is also commonly used to try to establish the diagnosis
of sarcoptic mange, Cheyletiella infestation, and some other ectoparasitic diseases, although it does not effectively rule out these diagnoses. The equipment needed to perform
a skin scraping is mineral oil, a scalpel blade (with or without a handle) or a curet,
microscope slides, coverslips, and a microscope.
Not all skin scrapings are made in the same way. Success in finding parasites is
enhanced if the technique of scraping is adapted to the specific parasite that the clinician
expects to find. The method of scraping for demodectic mites is different from that used
for sarcoptic mites. Cheyletiella, Dermanyssus, cat fur mites, and ear mites each necessitate a slightly different scraping technique.
No matter which type of scraping is made, a consistent, orderly examination of the
collected material should be done until a diagnosis is made or all the collected material
has been examined. It is easiest to start the examination at one end of the scraped
material mixed with oil and move the microscope stage straight across the slide in either a
horizontal or a vertical direction. At the end of the slide, the examination moves over one
field of vision and goes back in the opposite direction. This is continued back and forth
until all of the scraped material on the slide has been examined.
The following discussions elaborate on the special techniques needed to enhance the
effectiveness of scraping for specific parasites.
Examination for Parasites

• Demodectic Mites. Generally, multiple scrapings from new lesions should be
obtained. The affected skin should be squeezed between the thumb and the forefinger to
extrude the mites from the hair follicles. The obtained material is scraped up and placed
on a microscope slide. It is helpful to apply a drop of mineral oil to the skin site being
scraped, or to the scalpel blade or curet, to facilitate the adherence of material to the
blade. Then, additional material is obtained by scraping the skin more deeply until

I02 • Diagnostic Methods

A

B

c

D

E

F

G

H

FIGURE 2-27. Configuration of skin lesions. A, The annular configuration has a clear or less involved
center and is found in superficial spreading bacterial folliculitis, local seborrhea, demodicosis, and dermatophytosis. B, Single lesions are typified by feline acne, acral lick dermatitis, cysts, and many tumors. C, Polycyclic
configurations often result from the confluence of lesions or a spreading process. Examples are superficial
spreading bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis, or pyotraumatic dermatitis. D, Grouped lesions are clusters, often
the result of new foci developing around an old lesion. They are seen in folliculitis, insect bites, contact
dermatitis, and calcinosis cutis. E, Serpiginous lesions develop as a result of spreading, such as in canine scabies
or demodicosis. They may also occur as a result of the confluence and partial resolution of polycyclic lesions. F,
Linear configurations are best typified by the linear form of eosinophilic granuloma of cats or by contact with
irritant materials streaked along the skin. G, Arciform lesions usually result from the partial resolution of
polycyclic lesions such as spreading folliculitis, but they may result from spreading, as in canine scabies and
demodicosis. H, Central-healing (target) configurations are produced when the skin heals behind an advancing
front of a disease process. It is typical of certain dermatophytoses, demodicosis, and bacterial folliculitis.

Diagnostic Methods • 103
• Table 2-4

REGIONAL DIAGNOSIS OF NON-NEOPLASTIC
DERMATOSES

REGION

COMMON DISEASE

LESS COMMON DISEASE

Head

Atopy
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Facial fold intertrigo
Feline food hypersensitivity
Folliculitis, bacterial
Scabies, feline

Ear

Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Demodicosis
Dermatomyositis
Dermatophytosis
Fly dermatitis
Otitis externa (see Chap. 19)
Otodectic mange
Scabies, feline and canine
Seborrhea, marginal (pinna)
Chalazion
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Distichiasis
Entropion
Folliculitis, bacterial
Hordeolum
Seborrheic blepharitis
Trichiasis
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Drug eruption
Erythema multiforme
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus

Feline leprosy
Juvenile cellulitis
Pemphigus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Sporotrichosis
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Alopecia, pattern
Cold agglutinin disease
Frostbite
Melanoderma and alopecia of Yorkshire
terriers
Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis
Solar dermatitis, feline
Sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis
Trombiculiasis
Vasculitis and vasculopathy
Lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis

Eyelid

Nasal planum

Lip

Oral cavity (mucosal lesions)

Mucocutaneous junctions

Demodicosis
Indolent ulcer, feline
Lip fold intertrigo
Lupus erythematosus
Muzzle furunculosis, bacterial
Oral papillomatosis, canine
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vitiligo-like lesions
Discoid lupus erythematosus
EOSinophilic granuloma, canine and
feline
Eosinophilic plaque, feline
Erosions, chemical
Erosions, viral, feline
Erythema multi forme
Fusospirochetal stomatitis
Gingival hypertrophy
Indolent ulcer, feline
Marginal gingivitis, ulcerative, dental
Plasma cell stomatitis
Vegetative glOSSitiS (foreign body)
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Erythema multiforme
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Contact dermatitis
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum persicolor)
Hereditary nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis (Scottish terriers)
Sporotrichosis
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Vitiligo
Candidiasis
Contact dermatitis (plastic, rubber)
Juvenile cellulitis
Mucocutaneous bacterial pyoderma

Bullous pernphigoid
Candidiasis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Thallotoxicosis

Bullous pemphigoid
Candidiasis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Phaeohyphomycosis
Table continued on [ollounng page

104 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2-4

REGIONAL DIAGNOSIS OF NON·NEOPLASTIC
DERMATOSES Continued

REGION

COMMON DISEASE

LESS COMMON DISEASE

Mucocutaneous junctions
Continued

Vitiligo

Chin

Demodicosis
Eosinophilic granuloma, feline
Furunculosis, bacterial
Juvenile cellulitis
Atopy, feline
Dermoid sinus
Flea bite hypersensitivity, feline
Injection reactions
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Malassezia dermatitis
Folliculitis, bacterial
Sternal callus
Acanthosis nigricans
Atopy
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity
Malassezia dermatitis

Thallotoxicosis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and Shetland
sheepdog)
Dermatophytosis
Malassezia dermatitis

Neck

Lower chest
Axilla

Back

Trunk

Abdomen

Tail

Atopy
Comedo syndrome, Schnauzers
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity
Hypothyroidism
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia,
feline
Seborrhea, primary
Demodicosis, generalized
Folliculitis, bacterial
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Sebaceous adenitis
Atopy, feline
Eosinophilic plaque, feline
Feline symmetric alopecia
Folliculitis, bacterial
Food hypersensitivity, feline
Hyperadrenocorticism
Impetigo
Linear prepucial erythema
Panniculitis, sterile
Psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis, feline
Solar dermatitis, dog
Trombiculiasis
Feline symmetric alopecia
Flea bite hypersensitivity
Hyperplasia of tail gland, stud tail
Mechanical irritation (tail suckers)
Psychogenic dermatitis or alopecia,
feline

Contact dermatitis (collars)
Ulcerative dermatitis with linear
subepidermal fibrosis, feline

Contact dermatitis
Pelodera dermatitis
Bullous pemphigoid
Contact dermatitis
Erythema multiforme
Pemphigus vulgaris
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and Shetland
sheepdog)
Calcinosis cutis
Cheyletiellosis
Pediculosis

Hyperestrogenism, female
Hyposomatotropism
Panniculitis, sterile
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Subcomeal pustular dermatosis
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
Bullous pemphigoid
Calcinosis cutis
Contact dermatitis (ventral abdomen)
Erythema multiforme
Hookworm dermatitis
Mycobacteriosis, atypical, feline
Peladera dermatitis
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (collie and Shetland
sheepdog)

Cold agglutinin disease
Dermatomyositis
Frostbite
Vasculitis

Diagnostic Methods • 105
• Table 2-4

REGIONAL DIAGNOSIS OF NON·NEOPLASTIC
DERMATOSES Continued

REGION

COMMON DISEASE

Tail Continued

Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Tip of tail trauma
Anal sac disease
Malassezia dermatitis

Anus

Legs

Paws

Claws

Acral furunculosis, bacterial
Acral lick dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Elbow callus
Elbow callus pyoderma
Eosinophilic granuloma, feline
Hygroma
Metatarsal fistulae, German shepherd
Scabies, canine
Atopy
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Digital pad hyperkeratosis
Food hypersensitivity
Interdigital foreign bodies
Malassezia dermatitis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Plasma cell pododermatitis, feline
Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome
Trauma
Trombiculiasis
Hyperthyroidism, feline
Lupoid onychodystrophy
Paronychia
Bacterial
Feline leukemia
Traumatic
Trauma

LESS COMMON DISEASE

Bullous pemphigoid
Food hypersensitivity
Pemphigus vulgaris
Perianal gland hyperplasia
Decubital ulcers
Feline leprosy
Lymphangitis, bacterial, fungal
Lymphedema
Pelodera dermatitis

Acral mutilation
Collagen disease of German shepherd footpads
Contact dermatitis
Hookworm dermatitis
Leishmaniasis
Mycetoma
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Pelodera dermatitis
Phaeohyphomycosis
Tyrosinemia
Vitiligo (pads)
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Arteriovenous fistula
Bullous pemphigoid
Leishmaniasis
Onychomycosis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Vitiligo

capillary bleeding is produced. It is important that true capillary bleeding is obtained and
not blood from laceration. This is especially true when scraping the paw or the interdigital
area in cases of pododermatitis. Please note that the Chinese Shar pei breed presents an
unusual situation in which mites may be confined to the deep follicle, and even with good
scrapes characterized by capillary bleeding, false-negative results may occur. In addition,
skin scrapings may be negative in dogs with chronic demodectic pododermatitis, wherein
the paws are swollen, fibrotic, and granulomatous. Hair pluckings may reveal mites in
some of these cases and should be attempted before skin biopsy. Only skin biopsies are
diagnostic in some cases.
Generally, two or three drops of mineral oil are added to the usual amount of scraped
material on the microscope slide. The oil is mixed with the scraped material to obtain an
even consistency. Placing a coverslip on the material to be examined ensures a uniform
layer that is more readily examined. Lowering the condenser or closing the iris diaphragm
causes more light diffraction and contrast, resulting in easier recognition of the mites.
Diagnosis is made by demonstrating multiple adult mites, finding adult mites from

I 06 • Diagnostic Methods

multiple sites, or finding immature forms of mites (ova, larvae, and nymphs). When dogs
are fractious or sites are difficult to scrape, another technique may be used. Hairs from
the affected area can be plucked, placed in mineral oil on a slide, and examined. When
the findings are positive, this technique precludes the need for deep skin scrapes. However, negative results of hair pluck examinations should not rule out the presence of
Derrwdex.
It seems that skin scraping is a straightforward, easy laboratory procedure; however,
the authors have encountered referred demodicosis cases in which false-negative skin
scraping findings led to misdiagnosis or skin scrapings were not performed. Skin scrapings
are advised in most cases of canine pyoderma and scaling and follicular disorders, because
generalized demodicosis may be the primary disease. Skin scrapings should be performed
whenever Derrwdex infection is among the primary differential diagnostic possibilities, the
clinician is not certain of the diagnosis, or the dog does not adequately respond to the
initial therapy. Dogs typically harbor only one species of mite, Demodex canis, whereas
cats have two species, D. cati (which resembles the canine mite) and a second species that
is short and squat, D. gatoi.
Scrapings taken from a normal dog, especially from the face, may contain an occasional adult mite. If one or two mites are observed, repeated scrapings should be done.
Multiple positive results of scrapings from different sites should be considered abnormal.
Observing whether the mites are alive (mouthparts or legs moving) or dead is of prognostic value while the animal is being treated. As a case of generalized Demodex infestation
responds to treatment, the ratio of live to dead mites decreases, as does the ratio of eggs
and larvae to adults. If this is not occurring, the treatment regimen should be reevaluated.
• Canine Scabies Mites. Canine sarcoptic mites, Sarcoptes scabiei (var. canis), reside within the superficial epidermis. However, because small numbers of mites are
usually present, it is difficult to find one. Multiple superficial scrapings are indicated, with
emphasis on the pinnal margins and elbows. Skin that has not been excoriated, preferably
skin with red raised papules and yellowish crusts on top, should be scraped. The more
scrapings are performed, the more likely is a diagnosis. However, even with numerous
scrapings, scabies cannot be ruled out because of negative results.
Extensive amounts of material should be accumulated in the scrapings and spread on
microscope slides. Double-sized coverslips are sometimes useful. Alternatively, a second
microscope glass slide may be used instead of a normal coverslip to compress the thick
crusts. The clinician examines each field until a mite is found or all material has been
examined; one mite is diagnostic, Dark brown, round or oval fecal pellets or ova from
adult mites, if found, are also diagnostic. In difficult cases, it may be useful to accumulate
an even larger amount of hair and keratin debris from scrapings. The material is placed in
a warm solution of 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) for 20 minutes to digest keratin, and
the mixture is then stirred and centrifuged. Mites are thus concentrated and can often be
picked off the surface film and identified with a microscope.
• Feline Scabies Mites. The feline scabies mite, Notoedres cati, is much easier to
find than the canine mite; otherwise, the diagnostic techniques described for canine
scabies are appropriate. The best place to scrape is the head, the face, or the ears, in
areas with crusts and scales.
• Cheyletiella Mites. Cheyletiella mites are relatively large compared with scabies
mites and may even be seen with a magnifYing glass. They look like small white scales
that move, which is why the disease has been called "walking" dandruff. To examine for
them microscopically, the clinician may obtain superficial scrapings, which are not as
accurate as acetate tape impressions or flea-combing specimens. These mites may be
difficult to demonstrate in some cases, especially in cats.
• Chigger Mites. The most common chigger mite is Eutrombicula alfreddugesi.
These mites can be seen with the naked eye, especially on the concave surface of the
pinna. They appear as bright orange objects adhering tightly to the skin or centered in a
papule. They are easily recognized by their large size, relatively intense color, and tight

Diagnostic Methods • 107

attachment to the skin. They are often found around the external orifice of the ear canal
but are not present in the canal. They should be covered with mineral oil and picked up
with a scalpel blade. A true skin scraping is not needed. However, when removed from
the host for microscopic examination, they should immediately be placed in mineral oil, or
they may crawl away. Only the larval form is pathogenic, and these mites have only six
legs.
• Poultry Mites. Dermanyssus gallinae is a mite that attacks poultry, wild and cage
birds, and dogs and cats, as well as humans. It is red when engorged with blood;
otherwise, it is white, gray, or black. When the animal shows evidence of itching and the
history indicates exposure to bird or poultry housing, a skin scraping for this mite is
indicated. One or two mites on the dog or cat may cause severe pruritus. The best place
to find the mites is at excoriated sites.
The clinician collects the debris, scales, and crusts that harbor the mites. The materials are placed on a microscope slide, and several drops of mineral oil are added. The slide
is covered with another glass slide instead of a coverslip. The two slides are squeezed
together firmly to crush any crusted material. The acetate tape method of collection may
be used successfully.
• Cat Fur Mites. Lynxacarus radovsky are mites that attach themselves to the
external aspect of the hair shafts and therefore may be demonstrated microscopically by
searching for salt-and-pepper hairs. The mites are usually located along the topline. A true
superficial skin scraping can be made if the mites are suspected to be on the skin, but
plucking affected hairs and examining them in a mineral oil preparation is usually diagnostic. The acetate tape impression method can also be used.
• Ear Mites. Otodectes cynotis mites are usually located in the external ear canal of
dogs and cats. However, they may also be found on the skin, especially around the head,
the neck, the rump, and the tail. They may be found by superficial scraping or acetate
tape methods, such as described for Cheyletiella mites, and identified by microscopic
examination.

ACETATE TAPE IMPRESSION
This alternative to skin scraping has been recommended to find superficial ectoparasites
such as Cheyletiella mites, poultry mites, and cat fur mites. Clear, pressure-sensitive
acetate tape (Scotch No. 602 [3M Co.] is a good type) is pressed to the hair surface and
to the skin adjacent to parted hairs or in shaved areas. Superficial scales and debris are
collected when one suspects cheyletiellosis or poultry mites. The tape is then stuck with
pressure on a microscope slide and examined.

FLEA COMB AND FLOTATION
The recovery of Cheyletiella mites is enhanced with the flea-combing method. In this
technique, large areas of the body are combed and the collected scale and debris are put
in a fecal flotation solution. Material and scale that fallon the table or on a sheet of paper
placed under the patient during combing should also be added to the flotation solution. A
coverslip is applied to the surface of the flotation solution, is allowed to stand for 10
minutes, and then is transferred to a microscope slide and examined.
Debris Examination or Flotation

During examination of a pet, scabs and debris may readily be collected on the table
surface. This may be enhanced by briskly rubbing the pet's skin and hair coat while the
animal is standing on the table or over a piece of paper. This material may be collected
and examined directly or mixed with a fecal flotation solution. Direct examination may
find otherwise undetected flea dirt, flea eggs, or rarely, mites. Suspect flea dirt may be
placed on moistened white paper or cotton and will dissolve to an orange-red stain.

108 • Diagnostic Methods

Hair Examination
Plucking hairs from the skin and examining them under the microscope is referred to as
trichography and is helpful for diagnosing self-inflicted alopecia, dermatophytosis, color
dilution alopecia, nutritional or congenital hair dysplasias, trichomycosis axillaris, trichorrhexis nodosa, trichoptilosis, trichomalacia, pili torti, anagen defluxion, telogen defluxion,
endocrine alopecia, and pigmentary disturbances of hair growth. Hair examination may be
beneficial in some cases of demodicosis or Malassezia dermatitis. Trichography is performed by grasping a small number of hairs with the fingertips or rubber-covered hemostats, epilating them completely, laying them in the same orientation on a microscope
slide with mineral oil, and examining them with the low-power objective of the microscope. If abnormalities are detected during scanning, closer examination is necessary to
categorize the defect. It is important to epilate hairs in the direction they exit the skin so
as to minimize traumatic artifacts.
Hairs will have either an anagen or telogen root (bulb). Anagen bulbs are rounded,
smooth, shiny, glistening, and often pigmented and soft, so the root may bend (Fig. 228A). Telogen bulbs are c1ub- or spear-shaped, rough-surfaced, nonpigmented, and generally straight (see Fig. 2-28B). Catagen hairs are rarely seen and have bulbs intermediate
in appearance between anagen and telogen bulbs (see Fig. 2-28C). A normal hair shaft is
uniform in diameter and tapers gently to the tip (see Fig. 2-28D). Straight-coated animals
have straight hair shafts, whereas curly- or wavy-coated animals have twisted hair shafts.
All hairs should have a clearly discernible cuticle and a sharply demarcated cortex and
medulla (see Figs. 2-281 and J). Hair pigmentation depends on the coat color and breed
of animal but should not vary greatly from one hair to the next in regions where the coat
color is the same.
Normal adult animals have an admixture of anagen and telogen hairs, the ratio of
which varies with season, management factors, and a variety of other influences (see
Chap. 1). The anagen to telogen ratio can be determined by categorizing the bulbs from
approximately 100 hairs. Because no well-established normal values are available, the
authors rarely compute this ratio. However, estimation of this ratio can be valuable. No
normal animal should have all of its hairs in telogen (see Fig. 2-28E); therefore, this
finding suggests a diagnosis of telogen defluxion or follicular arrest (see Chap. 11).
Inappropriate numbers of telogen hairs (e.g., mostly telogen during the summer, when the
ratio should be approximately 50:50) suggest a diagnosis of a nutritional (see Chap. 17) or
endocrine and metabolic disease (see Chap. 10).
Examination of the hair shaft follows bulbar evaluation. Hairs that are inappropriately
curled, misshapen, and malformed (see Fig. 2-28P) suggest an underlying nutritional or
metabolic disease or congenitohereditary abnormality (see Figs. 2-28H and X) (see Chap.
12). Hairs with a normal shaft that are suddenly and cleanly broken (see Fig. 2-28G) or
longitudinally split (trichoptilosis, see Fig. 2-285) indicate external trauma from excessive
licking or scratching or too vigorous grooming. Breakage of hairs with abnormal shafts can
be seen in color dilution alopecia (see Figs. 2-28M and N) and other congenitohereditary
disorders (see Chap. 12), trichorrhexis nodosa (see Figs. 2-28Q and R) (see Chap. 11),
trichomycosis axillaris (see Chap. 4), anagen defluxion (see Fig. 2-28F), (see Chap. 11),
alopecia areata (see Fig. 2-28T) (see Chap. 9), trichomalacia (see Figs. 2-28U and V)
(see Chap. 11), and dermatophytosis (see Fig. 2-280). Hairs from normal color-diluted
animals must not be mistaken for a disease entity (see Figs. 2-28K and L). Abnormalities
in hair pigmentation that are not associated with color dilution alopecia have not been
well studied. When unusual pigmentation is observed, external sources (e.g., salivary
staining, chemicals and topical medications, sun bleaching) or conditions that influence the
transfer of pigment to the hair shaft (e.g., drugs, nutritional imbalances, endocrine disorders, and idiopathic pigmentary disorders) must be considered. Hair casts are usually seen
in diseases associated with follicular keratinization abnormalities, such as sebaceous adenitis (see Fig. 2-28W), demodicosis, primary seborrhea, follicular dysplasia, and endocrinopathies. These conditions should not be confused with louse nits (see Fig. 2-28Y) or
Cheyletiella eggs (see Fig. 2-28Z).

Diagnostic Methods • 109

FIGURE 2-28. A, Anagen hair bulb from a cat. Note that the bulb is rounded, pigmented, and bent to
one side. B, Telogen hair bulbs from a cat. The proximal ends of both the primary (large) and secondary
(small) hairs are pointed and lack pigment. C, Catagen hair bulb from a dog. The bulb is intermediate in
form between A and B. D, The distal ends of normal hairs from a cat. Note that they taper gently to a fine
point. E, Uniform telogenization of hairs from a cat with telogen defluxion. F, Anagen defluxion. Note the
area of transient methabolic arrest and the structural defect that is susceptible to fracture (arrow). G, Broken
ends. Cleanly fractured hairs from a cat with psychogenic alopecia. H, Shaft disorder of Abyssinian cats. Note
the onion-shaped swelling at the tip of the hair.
Illustration continued on following page

FIGURE 2-28 Continued. I, Primary hair shaft from a white cat. The single-layered outer cuticle covers
the hair shaft in shingle-like fashion. The nonpigmented cortex is the middle layer. The largest, dark central
layer is the medulla. J, Secondary hair shaft from same white cat; same magnification. K, Hair from a
normal blue point Siamese cat. The Maltese dilution gene is responsible for diluting black to blue (gray)
and orange to cream. It results in the irregular clumping of melanin (arrow), but does not change the
normal anatomy of the hair shaft. L, Hair from a normal color diluted dog (Weimeraner). Note that
melanin clumps vary in size and shape and are dispersed irregularly. They do not, however, change the
anatomy of the hair shaft. M, Hair from a dog (Doberman pinscher) with color dilution alopecia. Note how
the huge, irregularly shaped, sized, and dispersed melanin clumps are associated with a loss of normal hair
shaft anatomy. N, Close-up of another hair from dog in M. Note how the huge melanin clump has breached
the surface of the hair shaft. This area is now weakened and breakage can occur at this site. OJ and 02'
Hairs from a dog with dermatophytosis placed in mineral oil. 02, One hair (arrow) is normal in appearance
near the arrow, but becomes thickened and irregular (fuzzy) in outline as you follow it to the right. Also
note two other infected hairs below the arrowed hair, in the center of the field. Higher magnification of
such an area shows an irregular hair shaft whose anatomy has been obliterated by the presence of
arthroconidia (arrow).

Diagnostic Methods • I I I

FIGURE 2-28 Continued. P, Nutritional deficiency. Misshapen and malformed hairs. Q, Trichorrhexis
nodosa. Note nodular area in the center of the hair shaft where breakage will occur. R, Trichorrhexis
nodosa. Hair has fractured at a nodule, giving the appearance of two brooms end to end. S, Trichoptilosis
(split ends) in a dog. Note the distal end is split longitudinally through the hair shaft. T, "Exclamation
point" hair of alopecia areata. U, Medullary trichomalacia in a dog. Note focal thickening of hair shaft
(arrow) associated with a loss of medullary definition and longitudinal lamellar splitting. V, Another hair
shaft from same dog as in U at higher magnification. Affected area of hair is undergoing longitudinal
lamellar splitting (arrow). W, Hair cast. Prominent casts of keratosebaceous debris surrounding numerous
hair shafts.
Illustration continued on following page

I 12 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-28 Continued. X, Pili torti. Note 360degree twist of hair shaft on its long axis (arrow). Y,
Louse nit. Note the nit is operculated and that most of
the side of the nit is attached to the hair shaft. Z,
Cheyletiella egg. Note that the egg is not operculated,
and is only attached to the hair at one end.

Cytologic Examination
An enormous amount of vital diagnostic data can be obtained by microscopic examination
of stained material, such as smears of tissues or fluids, during a clinical examination.'! It is
possible to accomplish this with minimal equipment and in less than 5 minutes. The cost
is much less than that for a yeast culture, bacterial culture and susceptibility testing, or
biopsy, Although the same information as obtained by these more expensive tests is not
really gathered, microscopic examination often supplies sufficient data to narrow a differential diagnosis and develop a diagnostic plan.
The type of inflammatory, neoplastic, or other cellular infiltrate; the relative amount
of protein or mucin; and the presence of acantholytic keratinocytes, yeasts, and bacteria
can be determined by cytologic evaluation. It is the most common and most rewarding
office test performed by the authors. The equipment includes a clean microscope slide, a
coverslip, a stain, and a microscope.
SPECIMEN COLLECTION

Materials for cytologic examination can be gathered by a variety of techniques. Those
most commonly used by the authors include direct smears, impression smears, swab
smears, scrapings, and fine-needle aspiration. In most situations, clipping the hair should
be the only preparation of the surface. Scrubbing and applying alcohol or disinfectants are
used only in areas where a fine-needle aspirate of a mass lesion is to be done.
Direct smears are usually performed for fluid-containing lesions. A small amount of
material is collected with the comer of a slide, the tip of a needle, or another sharp-edged
object. The material is then smeared on the microscope slide. Smears should be made
gently to minimize disruption of cells (Fig. 2-29B).
Impression smears are often obtained when lesions are moist or greasy. This technique is also used after removing crusts, expressing fluid from lesions, or gently opening

FIGURE 2-29. A, Nondegenerate neutrophils in sterile pus. B, Degenerate neutrophils and nuclear streaming in pus from a dog with staphylococcal folliculitis. Note that most neutrophil nuclei are swollen and palestaining (short arrow), and many are streamed (long arrow). C, Close-up of another field from B. Most
neutrophils are degenerate (nuclei lightly stained and swollen) and many contain cocci (short arrow). Erythrocytes are also present (long arrow). D, Phagocytosed cocci. E, Phagocytosed rods. F, Sterile pyogranuloma.
Macrophages, nondegenerate neutrophils, and no microorganisms. G, Infectious pyogranuloma from a dog.
Compare the smaller, well-delineated and segmented nondegenerate neutrophil nuclei at the left with the
larger, swollen, lightly stained, and often streamed degenerate neutrophil nuclei to the right. H, Sterile
pyogranuloma. Nondegenerate neutrophils, no mocroorganisms, and neutrophagocytosis (arrows).
Illustration continued on following page

114 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-29 Continued. I, Sterile panniculitis. Nondegenerate neutrophils, no microorganisms, and macrophages containing numerous fat droplets. J, Eosinophils from a dog with sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. K, Pus
from a cat with pemphigus erythematosus. Note the nondegenerate neutrophils and lack of nuclear streaming
and microorganisms suggesting that this is a sterile inflammatory process. Note also the five acantholytic
keratinocytes in the center of the field, which are vel)' suggestive of pemphigus. L, Eosinophils and nondegenerate neutrophils from an atopic cat. M, Eosinophil and basophil (arrow) from a flea-hypersensitive cat. N,
Malassezia budding yeasts. 0, Mast cells from a canine mast cell tumor. P, Lymphocytes from a dog with
lymphosarcoma.

Diagnostic Methods • I 15

FIGURE 2-29 Continued. Q, Swab from normal skin. Four squames are folded or rolled (black arrow).
Others are faintly stained, lay flat, and contain melanin granules (white arrow). R, Swab from normal skin.
Nucleated keratinocyte contains numerous melanin granules. S, Same field as Q. White arrow indicates squame
containing two large, dark staining keratohyalin granules. T, Swab from a dog with otitis extema. There are
degenerate neutrophils, numerous rodlike bacteria, and a pseudohypha of Candida albicans (white arrow).

the surface of papules, pustules, or vesicles. The microscope slide is pressed directly
against the site to be examined.
Swab smears are most often used to obtain specimens from draining tracts or sinuses,
ear canals and interdigital webs, and dry crusty-surfaced lesions. The cotton-tipped applicator is moistened and inserted into the tract, the sinus, or the ear canal. For dry lesions
and interdigital webs, the moistened cotton tip is rubbed briskly over the skin surface.
After the lesion has been sampled, the cotton tip is rolled over the surface of the
microscope slide.
Scrapings are used to sample underneath crusts, vesicles, and peeling stratum corneum. They may also be used to collect more cells from the cut surface of surgically
removed biopsy specimens. The skin is scraped with a scalpel blade held at a 15- to 90degree angle to the surface. The collected material is then gently wiped onto the surface
of a microscope slide.
Fine-needle aspiration is most commonly used to sample nodules, tumors, and cysts,
although pustules, vesicles, or bullae may also be sampled this way. Fluid-filled lesions can
be aspirated with 20- or 22-gauge needles and a 3-ml syringe. Firm lesions should be
aspirated with 20-gauge needles and 6- or lO-ml syringes to obtain better suction. Fibrotic

116 • Diagnostic Methods

or dense masses may necessitate the use of an I8-gauge needle to get an adequate
sample. The needle is introduced into the lesion, and then suction is gently applied by
withdrawing the plunger of the syringe. Little withdrawing is necessary for fluid-filled
lesions, and the material within the needle is sufficient. In mass lesions, the plunger is
withdrawn one half to three fourths of the syringe volume. Suction is then interrupted
while the needle is redirected into another area of the mass. Suction is again applied, and
this procedure is repeated for a total of three or four times. Suction is then released, and
the needle is withdrawn from the lesion. The syringe and the needle are then separated,
air is introduced into the syringe, the needle is reattached, and the contents of the needle
and hub are expelled onto the surface of a glass slide. The material is then streaked across
the surface with another glass slide or the needle.

STAINS
Collected materials are allowed to dry on the slide. Oily, waxy, or dry skin samples
collected by direct impression or moistened cotton applicators should always be heat-fixed
before staining. After the specimens are heat-fixed and dried, the slide is stained and
examined microscopically. The stains of choice in clinical practice are the modified
Wright's stain (Diff Quik) and new methylene blue. Diff Quik is a quick and easy
Romanovsky-type stain. It gives less nuclear detail than the supravital stains such as new
methylene blue stain. However, it allows better differentiation of cytoplasmic structures
and organisms. Because this is most commonly what the practitioner is interested in with
non-neoplastic skin diseases, the Diff Quik stain is preferred by the authors. When a
neoplasm is suspected, two slides may be made and both stains used. A Gram stain is
occasionally used to acquire more information On the identity of bacteria.

CYTOLOGIC FINDINGS
The first step one takes to learn cutaneous cytology is the evaluation of normal skin,
Direct impressions or swab smears should be taken from normal dogs and cats. It is
valuable to sample several different cutaneous sites that are often sampled in clinical
cases. The ear canals, ventral neck, axilla, and interdigital areas are good sites to select to
demonstrate a variety of normal differences. These samples are dried, stained, and examined. Normal structures one will find include squames (angular, anuclear keratinocytes)
(Fig. 2-29Q), occasional nucleated keratinocytes, wax and lipid from ear canals, and
surface debris. Occasionally, free melanin granules may be seen, but these usually are
seen within keratinocytes (see Fig. 2-29R). Melanin granules should not be mistaken for
bacteria. Keratohyaline granules may also be found in keratinocytes, particularly nucleated
keratinocytes that come from the stratum granulosum of the epidermis (see Fig. 2-29S).
Evaluation of healthy skin sites also allows the practitioner to visualize and appreciate the
incidence of normal surface bacteria and yeast.
Cytologic study is helpful in disttnguishing between bacterial skin infection and bacterial colonization, to determine the relative depth of infection, to determine whether the
pustule contains bacteria or is sterile, to discover yeasts and fungi, to identify various
cutaneous neoplasms, or to find the acantholytic cells of the pemphigus diseases (see Fig.
2-29K).
Bacteria are a frequent finding in impression smears from skin and can be seen as
basophilic-staining organisms in specimens stained with new methylene blue or Diff Quik.
Although identification of the exact species of bacteria is not possible with a stain (as it is
in a culture), it is possible to distinguish cocci from rods (see Fig. 2-29D and Fig. 229E) and often to institute appropriate and effective antibiotic therapy without performing
a culture and antibiotic susceptibility testing. Generally, when cocci are seen, they are
Staphylococcus intermedius. If no bacteria are found in the stained fluid, the clinical
condition is probably not a bacterial pyoderma. If neither granulocytes nor intracellular
bacteria are seen, then a pyoderma is not present. In normal dogs, the average number of
cocci and rods per oil immersion field is less than twO. 12 When large numbers of bacteria

Diagnostic Methods • 117
are found, a condition of bacterial overgrowth is present and may contribute to pruritus
and disease. Although the bacteria are not a primary etiology or causing an infection, they
may be clinically relevant and appropriate antibiotic therapy will help alleviate some
symptoms.
It is also possible to obtain some clues as to the type of bacterial pyoderma or the
underlying condition." In general, deep infections have fewer bacteria present, with the
vast majority being intracellular. In addition, deep infections have a mixed cellular infiltrate with large numbers of histiocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. The
presence of these cells suggests that longer term antibiotic therapy is necessary. Large
numbers of intracellular and extracellular cocci are seen more commonly in cases of
impetigo or in dogs with bacterial infections associated with iatrogenic or natural Cushing's disease."
Direct impression smears are one of the most effective methods for detecting the
presence of Malassezia (see Fig. 2-29N). Although Malassezia pachydermatis is an inhabitant of the skin in most normal dogs and cats, the yeast is difficult to find by examining
direct impression smears and usually only 1 or 2 yeasts (rarely more than 20) are found
when I-cm'' sections of slide are examined (see Chap. 5).61 In a study done on skin with
lesions, the presence of more than one yeast organism per high-power microscopic field
was associated with certain diseases, such as seborrhea, or with previous antibiotic therapy
(see Chap. 5).62 Although the presence of more than one or two yeast per high-power
field is not diagnostic of Malassezia dermatitis, the authors believe that this indicates that
yeasts are present in abnormally high numbers and may be contributing to the pathologic
changes seen. The yeast Candida albicans is a dimorphic fungus with the tissue infective
form developing pseudohyphae. Because this organism in the yeast form may be a
contaminant and is not indicative of infection, histopathology is the preferred method of
confirming infection. On direct examination of infected and not contaminated tissue, a
mixture of budding yeast and pseudohyphae will be seen (see Fig. 2-29T).
Next, one looks for the cytologic response of the skin. Are there inflammatory cells
(see Fig. 2-29)? Are they eosinophils (see Figs. 2-29J and 2-29L), neutrophils, or
mononuclear cells? If eosinophils are present, any extracellular bacteria seen probably
represent colonization-not infection-and most likely an ectoparasitic or allergic disease
is the primary problem. This finding can be especially helpful when evaluating dogs with
suspected atopy or food hypersensitivity, because the presence of eosinophils strongly
suggests that these diseases alone are not the cause of the skin disease. Conversely, cats
with allergic skin disease frequently have tissue eosinophilia and smaller numbers of
basophils (see Fig. 2-29M). If large numbers of eosinophils are seen in combination with
degenerate neutrophils and intracellular bacteria, furunculosis is most likely present (free
keratin and hair shafts serve as endogenous foreign bodies). It must be emphasized that
eosinophils may be less numerous than expected or completely absent in inflammatory
exudates from animals receiving glucocorticoids.
If neutrophils are present, do they exhibit degenerative or toxic cytologic changes,
which suggest infection (see Figs. 2-29A to C)? If bacteria and inflammatory cells are
found in the same preparation, is there phagocytosis? Are the bacteria ingested by
individual neutrophils, or are they engulfed by macrophages and multinucleate histiocytic
giant cells (see Figs. 2-29F to H)? Are there many bacteria, but few or no inflammatory
cells, none of which exhibit degenerative cytologic changes or phagocytosis? When macrophages containing numerous clear cytoplasmic vacuoles are present, one should consider
the possibility of a lipophagic granuloma such as is seen with panniculitis and foreign-body
reactions (see Fig. 2-291).
Less commonly, cytologic examination allows the rapid recognition of unusual infections (infections due to Actinomycetes, mycobacteria, Leishmania, and subcutaneous and
deep mycoses); or suggests (1) sterile pustular dermatoses (pemphigus, sterile eosinophilic
pustulosis, and subcomeal pustular dermatosis); (2) autoimmune dermatoses (pemphigus)
(see Fig. 2-29K); and (3) neoplastic conditions (see Fig. 2-290 and 2-29P).
A synopsis of cytologic findings and their interpretation is presented in Table 2-5.
Cytomorphologic characteristics of neoplastic cells are presented in Table 2-6.

I 18 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2-5

CYTOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS FROM STAINED.
SMEARS

FINDING

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

Neutrophils
Degenerate
Nondegenerate

Bacterial infection
Sterile inflammation (e.g., canine allergy, pemphigus, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, linear IgA pustular dermatosis), initants, foreign-body reaction
Ectoparasitism, endoparasitism, feline allergy, furunculosis, eosinophilic granuloma, feline eosinophilic plaque, mast cell
tumor, pemphigus, sterile eosinophilic folliculitis, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Ectoparasitism, endoparasitism, feline allergy
Ectoparasitism, feline allergy, mast cell tumor (poorly stained
with Dlff Quik)

Eosinophils

Basophils
Mast cells
Lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells
Granulomatous

Pyogranulomatous (many neutrophils too)
Eosinophilic granulomatous
Plasma cells
Acanthocytes
Few
Many
Bacteria
Intracellular
Extracellular only
Yeast]
Peanut shaped
Fungi
Spores, hyphae
Atypical or monomorphous cell population
Clumped and rounded
Individual, rounded, and numerous
Individual, rounded or elongated, and
sparse

Infectious (especially furunculosis) versus sterile (e.g., foreign
body, sterile granuloma syndrome, metatarsal fistulae, and
sterile panniculitis)
Same as for granulomatous
Furunculosis, ruptured keratinous cyst, eosinophilic granuloma
Plasma cell pododermatitis, plasmacytoma
Any suppurative dermatosis
Pemphigus, dermatophytosis
Infection
Colonization
Malassezia or rarely Candida dermatitis
Fungal infection

Epithelial neoplasm
Lymphoreticular or mast cell neoplasm
Mesenchymal neoplasm

'DiIT Quik or new methylene blue.
[Commonly seen, rarely pathogenic.

Culture and Examination for Fungi
Identification of fungi that have been isolated provides important information for case
management and for public health decisions (see Chap, 5), When agents causing subcutaneous or deep mycoses are suspected, the samples should be sent to a veterinary laboratory with appropriate mycology skills.60 The propagation of many pathologic fungi, especially the agents of subcutaneous and deep mycoses, creates airborne health hazards,

• Table 2-6

CYTOMORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS
SUGGESTIVE OF MALIGNANCY

GENERAL FINDINGS

NUCLEAR FINDINGS

CYTOPLASMIC FINDINGS

Pleomorphism (variable cell
forms)
Variable nucleus to cytoplasm
ratios
Variable staining intensity

Marked variation in size
Coarsely clumped, sometimes jagged
chromatin
Nuclear molding
Peripheral displacement by cytoplasmic secretions or vacuoles
Prominent, occasionally giant, or angular nucleoli

Variable staining intensity, sometimes
dark blue
Discrete, punctate vacuoles
Variable amounts

Diagnostic Methods • 119

Additionally, examinations of the mycelial phase should be carried out in biological safety
cabinets. For these reasons, the authors recommend that, in the general practice setting,
fungal assessments be limited to direct tissue microscopic examination and culturing for
dermatophytes. For other suspected fungal infections, samples should be collected and
sent to an appropriate laboratory.
In general, for subcutaneous and deep mycotic infections, punch biopsies from the
lesion are the best way to obtain a culture specimen. Pieces from the margin and the
center of lesions, as well as any different-appearing lesions, should be submitted for
laboratory analysis. Tissue samples may be placed in a bacteriologic transport medium and
should reach the laboratory within 12 hours, although up to 24 hours is permissible.
Refrigeration may be helpful to preserve some fungi but Aspergillus spp. and Zygomycetes
are sensitive to cold. When these organisms are suspected, the sample should be kept at
room temperature.
Direct examination for most nondermatophyte fungal organisms is acceptable, as
described under Cytologic Examination in this chapter. In general, the Diff Quik stain is
suitable for many fungi, especially yeasts and Histoplasma capsulatum. Periodic acidSchiff stain is useful but beyond the level of most general practice settings. India ink
mixed with tissue fluid outlines the capsule of yeast and has been useful for identifying
Cryptococcus neoformans. Clearing samples with 10% KOH as discussed for dermatophytes under Direct Examination in this chapter may help identify hyphae of other fungi.
When collecting samples for hyphal examination, one should not use gauze or cotton
swabs because fibers may be mistaken for hyphae.

EXAMINATION FOR DERMATOPHYTES
In contrast to the case for other mycotic diseases, suspected cases of dermatophytosis and
Malassezia infestation can readily be tested for in a general practice situation. To ascertain
the cause of a dermatophytosis, proper specimen collection and isolation and correct
identification of dermatophytes are necessary.
Wood's Lamp Examination

One aid in specimen collection is the Wood's lamp examination. The Wood's lamp is an
ultraviolet light with a light wave of 253.7 nm that is filtered through a cobalt or nickel
filter. The Wood's lamp should be turned on and allowed to warm up for 5 to 10 minutes,
because the stability of the light's wavelength and intensity is temperature dependent. The
animal should be placed in a dark room and examined under the light of the Wood's
lamp. When exposed to the ultraviolet light, hairs invaded by M. canis may result in a
yellow-green fluorescence in 30% to 80% of the isolates. Hairs should be exposed for 3 to
5 minutes, because some strains are slow to show the obvious yellow-green color. The
fluorescence is due to tryptophan metabolites produced by the fungus. These metabolites
are produced only by fungi that have invaded actively growing hair and cannot be elicited
from an in vitro infection of hair. To decrease the number of false-positive results, it is
imperative that the individual hair shafts are seen to fluoresce. Fluorescence is not present
in scales or crusts or in cultures of dermatophytes. Other less common dermatophytes that
may fluoresce include Microsporum distortum, M. audouinii, and Trichophyton schoenleinii.
Many factors influence fluorescence. The use of medications such as iodine destroys
it. Bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Corynebacterium minutissimum may
fluoresce but not with the apple green color of a dermatophyte-infected hair. Keratin,
soap, petroleum, and other medication may fluoresce and give false-positive reactions. If
the short stubs of hair produce fluorescence, the proximal end of hairs extracted from the
follicles should fluoresce. These fluorescing hairs should be plucked with forceps and used
for inoculation of fungal medium or for microscopic examination.
Specimen Collection

Accurate specimen collection is necessary to isolate dermatophytes. Hair is most commonly collected for the isolation of dermatophytes. In rare cases of Trichophyton spp.

120 • Diagnostic Methods

infection, particularly those characterized by extensive scarring, and in all cases of Microsporum persicolor infection, the hyphae may only be present in the stratum comeum.v In
these cases, superficial scrapings and not just hair should be sampled. When a Wood's
lamp examination is positive, hairs that fluoresce are selected and removed with a forceps
or a hemostat. When the Wood's lamp examination is negative, another means of collecting infected hair for culture is the toothbrush (MacKenzie) method. A sterile toothbrush
is gently brushed through the animal's coat to accumulate hair and keratin debris. The
toothbrush is then gently pressed onto the surface of the culture medium. The technique
has proved especially valuable in detecting asymptomatic cats that may be carriers of M.
canis.
Hair may also be collected from the margins of lesions. Whenever possible, one
should select newly formed or actively expanding lesions that have not been recently
medicated. The margins, as well as adjacent areas, are sampled. One should look for hairs
that are broken or misshapen and associated with inflammation, scale, or crust. In longhaired breeds, the hairs can be shaved so that only 0.5 to 1 em protrudes above the skin.
However, if hairs are to be sampled from a lesion for fungal culture, it is valuable to clip
excessive hair and gently clean the area. Patting the lesion clean with 70% alcoholimpregnated gauze or cotton and then letting it air dry decreases the occurrence of
contaminants. The hairs obtained by these methods can be used for culture or microscopic examination. Some scales may also be collected, but one should avoid putting
exudates or medications on the medium.
Claws

Claws and pads are frequently heavily contaminated with microorganisms and may have
transient dermatophytes present. Therefore, before claws and pads are sampled, they need
to be prepared with 70% alcohol scrubs. Material from within the claw or the concave
aspects should be collected whenever possible. The distal portion of the claws should be
removed and discarded and samples then collected from the remaining claw. An alternative is to avulse or elevate pieces of claw and obtain the sample by scraping the concave
aspect of the claw.
Hair, scale, and claw collected from suspected lesions can be placed onto culture
medium and into mineral oil or clearing solution on a microscope slide for direct examination. Scrapings should never be placed in closed containers such as screw-capped tubes,
which increase moisture and encourage the growth of contaminating bacteria and thus
make it more difficult to isolate the dermatophytes. If the samples are to be transported
and not immediately used, they may be placed in a clean envelope or a pill vial.
Direct Examination

The clinician should practice direct examination to become adept at identifying dermatophytes. Even the experienced clinician does not always obtain a diagnosis in cases of
dermatophytosis. A negative direct examination finding does not rule out a diagnosis of
dermatophytosis. Because most infections in animals are caused by ectothrix dermatophytes, clearing the hairs is not as necessary as it is for infections involving humans. The
authors use only mineral oil to suspend hair with suspected dermatophytes. Others recommend clearing the keratin to visualize the hyphae and spores better. The hair, scales, and
claw material may first be cleared by placing the specimens in several drops of 10% to
20% KOH on a microscope slide. A coverslip is added, and the slide is gently heated for
15 to 20 seconds. One should avoid overheating and boiling the sample. Alternatively, the
preparation may be allowed to stand for 30 minutes at room temperature. An excellent
result is obtained if the mount is placed on the microscope lamp for gentle heating. The
preparation is ready for examination in 15 to 20 minutes, and the structures are better
preserved.
The following formula called chlorphenolac has been recommended as a replacement
for the KOH solution in the digestion process to clear keratin: 50 g of chloral hydrate is
added to 25 ml of liquid phenol and 25 ml of liquid lactic acid. Several days may pass
before the crystals go into solution, but when they do, no precipitate forms. The slide can

Diagnostic Methods v

121

be read almost immediately after hair and keratin are added to this chloral hydratephenol-lactic acid solution.
Examination of cleared, mineral oil-suspended, or stained scrapings from mycotic
lesions may reveal yeasts, conidia, hyphae, or pseudohyphae. To find dermatophyte-infected hairs, one should look for fragmented pieces of hair that are larger in diameter
than most hairs present (see Fig. 2-280). Generally, it is best to look near the hair bulbs
and watch for distorted hairs. Dermatophyte-infected hairs appear swollen and frayed,
irregular, or fuzzy in outline, and the clear definition between cuticle, cortex, and medulla
is lost. It is also important to remember that dermatophytes do not form macroconidia in
tissue. Any macroconidia seen represent saprophytes and have no known clinical significance. The hyphae of the common dermatophytes are usually uniform in diameter (2 to
3 /-Lm), septate, and variable in length and degree of branching. Older hyphae are usually
wider and may be divided into beadlike chains of rounded cells (arthroconidia).
In haired skin and scales from small animals, the branched septate hyphae of different
dermatophytes may be identical to one another and necessitate isolation and culture for
identification.
In an ectothrix invasion of hair, hyphae may be seen within the hair shaft, but they
grow outward and show a great propensity to form arthroconidia in a mosaic pattern on
the surface of the hair. Large conidia (5 to 8 /-Lm) in sparse chains outside the hairs are
seen in Microsporum gypseum and M. vanbreuseghemU infections. Intermediate-sized
conidia (3 to 7 /-Lm) in dense chains are seen with Trichophyton mentagrophytes, T.
verrucosum, and T. equinum infections.
An endothrix infection is characterized by conidia formation within the hair shaft; the
hair cuticle is not broken, but the hairs break off or curl. Endothrix invasion is rarely seen
in animals but is typical of Trichophyton tonsurans infections in humans. The clinician
should practice to develop the technique of direct examination for fungi. The best way to
learn this technique is to find a highly Wood's lamp-positive M. canis infection in the cat.
A large volume of positive hairs should be collected and kept in a loosely closed pill vial.
Every few days, some hairs should be removed and examined until the affected hairs are
rapidly recognized. After this is done, affected hairs should be mixed with normal hairs
and the process repeatedseveral times duringthe succeeding weeks. This type of practice
greatly improves one's ability to locate dermatophyte-infected hairs by microscopic examination.
FUNGAL CULTURE
Sabouraud's dextrose agar and dermatophyte test medium (DTM) are traditionally used in
clinical veterinary mycology for isolation of fungi; however, other media are available,
although rarely used in general practice. DTM is essentially a Sabouraud's dextrose agar
containing cycloheximide, gentamicin, and chlortetracycline as antifungal and antibacterial
agents. The pH indicator phenol red has been added. Dermatophytes first use protein in
the medium, with alkaline metabolites turning the medium from yellow to red (see Fig.
2-30A). When the protein is exhausted, the dermatophytes use carbohydrates, giving off
acid metabolites. The medium changes from red to yellow. Most other fungi use carbohydrates first and proteins only later; they too may produce a change to red in DTM - but
only after a prolonged incubation (10 to 14 days or longer). Consequently, DTM cultures
should be examined daily for the first 10 days. Fungi such as Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Sporothrix schenckii, H. capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, Pseudoallescheria boydU, and
some Aspergillus species may cause a change to red in DTM, so microscopic examination
is essential to avoid an erroneous presumptive diagnosis.
Because cycloheximide is present in DTM, fungi sensitive to it are not isolated.
Organisms sensitive to cycloheximide include Cryptococcus neoformans, many members of
the Zygomycota, some Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., P. boydU, and many agents of
phaeohyphomycosis. DTM may depress the development of conidia, mask colony pigmentation, and inhibit the growth of some pathogens. Therefore, it is valuable to place part of
the specimen on plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar. In some cases, identification is more

122 • Diagnostic Methods

readily obtainable from-the sample inoculated onto Sabouraud's dextrose agar. For this
reason, a double plate containing one side of DTM and one of Sabouraud's dextrose agar
has gained favor among many dermatologists. When bottles containing DTM are used, it
maysbe difficult to get a toothbrush onto the medium surface. When bottles are used, it is
also important to put the lid on loosely.
Skin scrapings, claws, and hair should be inoculated onto Sabouraud's dextrose agar
and DTM. Desiccation and exposure to ultraviolet hght hinder growth. Therefore, cultures
should be incubated in the dark at 30°C with 30% humidity. A pan of water in the
incubator usually provides enough humidity. Cultures should be incubated for 10 to 14
days and should be checked daily for fungal growth. Proper interpretation of the DTM
culture necessitates recognition of the red color change simultaneously with visible mycehal growth. False-positive results occur most commonly when the cultures are not observed frequently. As a saprophyte grows, it eventually turns the media red, thus emphasizing the importance of correlating the initial mycelial growth with the color change.
Figure 2-30 illustrates the gross colony morphologic patterns of some common fungi.

IDENTIFICATION OF FUNGI
If a suspected dermatophyte is grown on culture, it should be identified. This necessitates
collection of macroconidia from the mycelial surface. Generally, the colony needs to grow
for 7 to 10 days before macroconidia are produced. Although colonies grown on DTM
may provide adequate macroconidia, in some cases the colonies on the Sabouraud's
dextrose agar may need to be sampled to find them. In occasional cases, especially with
Trichophyton spp., no macroconidia are found. Subculturing these colonies on Sabouraud's dextrose agar or potato dextrose agar may facilitate sporulation. Alternatively, the
sample may be sent to a diagnostic laboratory for identification.
The macroconidia are most readily collected by gently applying the sticky side of clear
acetate tape (Scotch No. 602) to the aerial surface. The tape with sample is then placed
onto several drops of lactophenol cotton blue that is on the surface of a microscope slide.
A coverslip is placed over the tape and sample, and this is examined by microscopy.
Salient facts useful in identifYing the three major dermatophytes (Figs. 2-30 and 231) are briefly described in the next section .
• Microsporum canis. These lesions may show a yellow-green fluorescence. Hairs that
fluoresce should be plucked for culture or microscopic examination. Examination of a
KOH preparation may reveal arthrospores present in masses on the hair shaft.
Colony Morphology. On Sabouraud's dextrose agar, M. canis produces a white
cottony- to woolly-appearing colony (see Figs. 2-30A and B). With age, the colony
becomes more powdery, has a central depressed area, and may show radial folds. The
pigment on the undersurface of the colony is yellow-orange, becoming dull orange-brown.
On potato dextrose agar, the pigment is lemon yellow.
Microscopic Morphology. M. canis usually forms abundant spindle-shaped macroconidia with thick echinulate walls. The echinulations (spines) are more pronounced at the
terminal end, which often forms a knob. The macroconidia are composed of six or more
cells (see Fig. 2-31A). One-celled microconidia may be seen. Conidia develop best on
rice agar medium and poorly or not at all on Sabouraud's dextrose agar.
Diagnostic Criteria. The distinctive macroconidia and the lemon yellow pigment are
characteristic of M. canis.
• Microsporum gypseum. Fluorescence is rare and, if present, is dull. The arthrospores on hair shafts are larger than those of M. canis.
Colony Morphology. Colonies are rapid growing, with a flat to granular texture and
a buff to cinnamon brown color (see Fig. 2-30C). Sterile white mycelia may develop in
time. The undersurface pigmentation is pale yellow to tan.
Microscopic Morphology. Echinulate macroconidia contain up to six cells with relatively thin walls (see Fig. 2-31B). The abundant ellipsoid macroconidia lack the terminal
knob present in M. canis. One-celled microconidia may be present.

Diagnostic Methods • 123

FIGURE 2-30. Fungal colonies. A, Seven-day culture of M. canis. Left side, plain Sabouraud's dextrose agar;
right side, DTM medium. B, Gross colony of M. canis. C, Gross colony of M. gypseum. D, Gross colony of T.
rrumtagrophytes. E, Gross colony of Aspergillus. F, Gross colony of Penicillium. G, Gross colony of Candida
albicans. H, Gross colony of Alternaria. (A, C, E, H, courtesy C. Pinello. B, D, F, G, courtesy P. Jacobs.)

I 24 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-31. A, Characteristic microscopic
morphology of M. canis B, characteristic microscopic morphology of M. gypseum C, characteristic
microscopic morphology of T. mentagrophytes. The
macroconidia and spirals are microscopic structures. The hair shafts are much larger.

Diagnostic Criteria. The abundant ellipsoid macroconidia and flat to granular texture of the colony are definitive features .
• Trichophyton mentagrophytes. No fluorescence is seen with Wood's light. Ectothrix
chains of arthroconidia may be observed on hair.
Colony Morphology. Colony morphologic characteristics are variable. Most zoophilic
forms produce a flat colony with a white to cream-colored powdery surface (see Fig. 230D). The color of the undersurface is usually brown to tan, but may be dark red. The
anthropophilic form produces a colony with a white cottony surface.
Microscopic Morphology. The zoophilic form of T. mentagrophytes produces globose microconidia that may be arranged singly along the hyphae or in grapelike clusters.
Macroconidia, if present, are cigar-shaped with thin smooth walls (see Fig. 2-31C). Some
strains produce spiral hyphae, which may also be seen in other dermatophytes but are
most characteristic of Trichophyton. Samples that show this change should be submitted
to a diagnostic laboratory for identification.
Diagnostic Criteria. The colony morphologic characteristics, spiral hyphae, macroconidia, and microconidia are useful for identifying T. mentagrophytes. When grown on
potato dextrose agar, T. mentagrophytes does not produce a dark red pigment like that
formed by T. rubrum. Strains of T. mentagrophytes are more apt to be urease positive

Diagnostic Methods • 125

than is T. rubrum. Because T. rubrum may be incorrectly identified as T. mentagrophytes,
the above-mentioned differential features are important.

Examination for Bacteria

In general practice, cytologic examination is the primary method used to identify the
presence of pathogenic bacteria. Unusual lesions, nodular granulomatous lesions, and
draining nodules should also be cultured. Bacterial culture and susceptibility testing are
not routinely cost effective for the initial work-up of the case with a suspected bacterial
pyoderma. Cytologic examination is the initial test of choice, and if intracellular cocci are
seen, empirical antibiotic therapy for coagulase-positive staphylococci is warranted. When
cytologic study reveals rod-shaped organisms, or when cocci are seen but appropriate
empirical therapy is ineffective, bacterial culture and susceptibility testing are indicated.
Veterinarians frequently take specimens for bacterial culture but infrequently grow and
Identify the cultures in their own practice. Specimens should be collected for culture,
properly prepared, and rapidly sent to a skilled microbiologist in a laboratory equipped to
provide prompt, accurate identification and antibacterial susceptibilities.
The selection of appropriate lesions for culturing is critical. Moist erosions and many
crusts may be contaminated by bacteria, and cultures are not routinely recommended for
these lesions. In cases with pustules, an intact pustule should be opened with a sterile
needle. The pus collected on the needle should be transferred to the tip of a sterile swab.
Papules may also be superficially punctured, and a relatively serous droplet of pus may be
obtained. These superficial papular and pustular lesions should not be prepared at all,
because negative cultures may result. With superficial cultures, a positive culture does not
prove pathogenicity, and concurrent cytologic examination should be performed. If more
than one type of organism is identified on cytologic examination, as is common in cases of
otitis, the laboratory should be so informed. This allows documentation of the intracellular
location of bacteria, which confirms their role in eliciting an inflammatory response. In
cases with furuncles, needle aspirates may be taken and cultured. When plaques, nodules,
and fistulous tracts are to be cultured, the surface is disinfected and samples are taken
aseptically by skin biopsy, The skin sample is placed in a culture transport medium and
submitted to the laboratory, where it should be ground and cultured.
When unusual bacterial diseases such as mycobacteriosis, bacterial pseudomycetoma,
actinomycosis, actinobacillosis, and nocardiosis are suspected, unstained direct smears and
tissue biopsy specimens should be submitted. The laboratory should be informed of the
suspected disorder.
Deep lesions, cellulitis, and nodular lesions may also be cultured for anaerobic bacteria. Again, tissue biopsy is preferred, and special transport media or equipment is necessary. A good diagnostic laboratory supplies material for sample transport.
Biopsy and Dermatohistopathologic Examination
Skin biopsy is one of the most powerful tools in dermatology. 19, 23, 43, 53-55 However,
maximization of the potential benefits of this tool necessitates enthusiastic, skilled teamwork between a clinician who has carefully selected, procured, and preserved the specimens and a pathologist who has carefully processed, perused, and interpreted the specimens. When the clinician and the pathologist truly work together, the skin biopsy can
correctly reflect the dermatologic diagnosis in more than 90% of cases.v' However, despite
this, skin biopsies are often not performed or are done relatively late in the diagnostic
work-up. In other cases, the skin biopsy findings are unrewarding because of poor specimen selection, poor technique, or both. In many dermatologic cases, the differential
diagnosis primarily includes diseases that can be diagnosed only by biopsy or other
nonhematologic or serum laboratory tests. Yet, the authors see numerous cases in which a
variety of hematologic tests and cultures have been performed when the biopsy is the
most cost-effective test to recommend to the client.

I 26 • Diagnostic Methods

When the condition presented is not readily recognized, the skin biopsy is often the
most informative test. Skin biopsy should not be regarded as merely a diagnostic aid for
the difficult case or for the case that can be diagnosed only by biopsy. It is also helpful in
establishing the group of diseases to consider. Even without a definitive diagnosis, a
biopsy usually helps guide the clinician in the appropriate diagnostic direction. It provides
a permanent record of the pathologic changes present at a particular time, and knowledge
of this pathologic finding stimulates the clinician to think more deeply about the basic
cellular changes underlying the disease. Symptomatic therapies may also be directed on
the basis of cytologic findings.
Although biopsies are helpful, it is still important for the clinician to remember that
they only add information. The diagnosis is usually made by the clinician, who correlates
all the relevant findings of a case, not by the pathologist. The biopsy contributes to those
findings; it does not replace a thorough history, physical examination, or other ancillary
test results. Excellent textbooks on veterinary dermatopathology are now available.w 54, 55

WHEN TO BIOPSY
There are no definite rules on when to perform a skin biopsy. The following suggestions
are offered as general guidelines. Biopsy should be performed on (1) all obviously neoplastic or suspected neoplastic lesions; (2) all persistent ulcerations; (3) any case that is
likely to have the major diseases that are most readily diagnosed by biopsy (e.g., follicular
dysplasia, zinc-responsive dermatosis, sebaceous adenitis, dermatomyositis, and immunemediated skin disease); (4) a dermatosis that is not responding to apparently rational
therapy; (5) any dermatosis that, in the experience of the clinician, is unusual or appears
serious; (6) vesicular dermatitis; and (7) any suspected condition for which the therapy is
expensive, dangerous, or sufficiently time consuming to necessitate a definitive diagnosis
before beginning treatment.
In general, skin biopsy should be performed within 3 weeks for any dermatosis that is
not responding to what appears to be appropriate therapy. This early intervention (1)
helps obviate the nonspecific, masking, and misleading changes due to chronicity, the
administration of topical and systemic medicaments, excoriation, and secondary infection
and (2) allows more rapid institution of specific therapy, thus reducing permanent disease
sequelae (scarring, alopecia), the patient's suffering, and needless cost to the owner. Antiinflammatory agents can dramatically affect the histologic appearance of many dermatoses.
The administration of such agents, especially glucocorticoids, should optimally be stopped
for 2 to 3 weeks before biopsy. The histopathologic changes caused by secondary bacterial
pyoderma often obliterate the histopathologic features of any concurrent dermatoses. It is
imperative to eliminate these secondary infections with appropriate systemic antibiotic
therapy before biopsies are performed.

WHAT TO BIOPSY
The selection of appropriate biopsy sites is partly an art. Experienced clinicians often pick
lesions and subtle changes that they suspect will show diagnostic changes. They are
already aware of what histopathologic changes are helpful in making a diagnosis. They also
know what types of changes may be expected to be found with certain clinical lesions. For
example, pigmentary incontinence is a helpful histopathologic feature of lupus erythematosus. The clinician who knows this, and also knows that slate blue depigmenting lesions
have that color because of dermal melanin (often from pigmentary incontinence), selects
those sites for biopsy. One histologic criterion of lupus is likely to be present because the
clinician knew the pathogenesis of that lesion.
If the disease is an unknown one or appears strange, a biopsy is important. If the
distribution of lesions is unusual for the suspected disease, the clinician obtains biopsy
specimens from the unusual areas, not just those typical of the suspected disease. It is also
important to perform biopsy of areas representative of primary diseases and not just
secondary complications. Many clinicians perform biopsy of secondary bacterial pyoderma

Diagnostic Methods • 127

lesions but not noninfected areas in cases with underlying allergy or keratinization disorders.
The histologic examination of the full spectrum of lesions present gives more information than does the examination of one lesion or stage. Therefore, the clinician should take
multiple samples and obtain specimens from a variety of lesions. When primary lesions
are present, a sample of at least one should be submitted to the laboratory. Fluid-filled
lesions (pustules, vesicles) are often fragile and transient in canine and feline skin, and if
present, should be sampled as soon as possible. If the suspected disease historically has
pustules, having the patient return may allow sampling of the most appropriate lesions. In
other cases, the patient may be hospitalized and be examined every 2 to 4 hours to find
early intact lesions for biopsy. Most diseases that can be diagnosed by dermatopathologic
examination have early, fully developed, and late changes. The greater the number of
characteristic changes recognized, the more accurate the diagnoses are, and by selecting a
variety of lesions, it is more likely that multiple characteristic changes are seen.
Multiple samples can document a pathologic continuum. Whenever possible, the
clinician obtains biopsy specimens from the spontaneous primary lesions (macules, papules, pustules, vesicles, bullae, nodules, and tumors) and secondary lesions. Examination of
crusts may sometimes add as much information as a biopsy of a papule. A greater number
of biopsy specimens maximizes results. However, in practice, clinicians are usually limited
to three to five samples. Most laboratories charge the same fee for one to three biopsy
specimens submitted in the same container. Most important is that one learns from biopsy
attempts. One should try to pay attention to what lesions are selected and what specimens
give the best results. With practice, the clinician becomes more adept at selecting informative biopsy sites. Reading does not replace practice, attention to results, and experience,
but it can help the clinician to achieve some proficiency in the art of maximizing the
benefits of skin biopsy,

INSTRUMENTS REQUIRED
Biopsies are often performed Simply and quickly with just local anesthesia. Two percent
lidocaine; a selection of punch biopsies of different sizes; Adson thumb forceps; iris or
small, curved scissors; formalin vials; needles and suture material; needle holders; wooden
tongue depressors; and gauze pads are the equipment that is needed for most cases.
Occasionally, scalpel handles, blades, and large formalin vials may also be necessary.

HOW TO BIOPSY
In general, a 6-mm biopsy punch provides an adequate specimen. Four-millimeter
punches are reserved for difficult sites such as near the eye, on the pinna, and on the
nasal planum and foot pads of cats and small dogs. It is imperative not to include any
Significant amount of normal skin margin with punch biopsy specimens. Unless the person
obtaining the biopsy specimen personally supervises the processing of the specimen in the
tissue block, rotation in the wrong direction may result in failure to section the pathologic
portion of the specimen. In general, when a punch biopsy specimen is received at the
laboratory, it is cut in half through the center. Therefore, a macule, pustule, papule, or
small lesion should be centered in the biopsy specimen. If the lesion is to one side, only
the normal tissue may be examined. The sample is also generally cut parallel to the
growth of the hair. In many laboratories, only half of the specimen is sectioned and
processed; the other half is saved in case problems occur and new sections or blocks are
needed. So even with deeper cuts, if the wrong half is blocked, the lesion may not be
present. The clinician must also realize that, after fixation, erythema and color changes are
not detectable by the pathologist who sections the sample. Small lesions such as papules
and pustules may no longer be grossly visible. The biopsy punch should be rotated in only
one direction so as to minimize shearing artifacts.
It is important for the clinician to compare the pathologist's report with the description of the clinical lesion. If a pustule was observed clinically and the pathologist's report

128 • Diagnostic Methods

does not describe a pustule, it may have been missed. If a biopsied lesion is missed or the
tissue is interpreted as normal, the clinician should explain this to the pathologist and
obtain deeper sections to find the lesion.
It is also important for the clinician to be aware of what changes occur in the
specimen after the biopsy. Autolysis starts to occur almost immediately after removal of
the biopsy specimen. Therefore, it is important to place the newly acquired samples into
appropriate fixatives (10% neutral phosphate buffered formalin) immediately. This should
be done for each sample; one should not wait until all samples are taken before placing
them in formalin. Punch biopsy specimens left under a hot surgery light have microscopically observable damage in less than 5 minutes.!?
Secondary bacterial infections frequently complicate canine and, to a lesser extent,
feline dermatoses. The histopathologic changes induced by bacterial infection can obliterate the changes associated with the underlying disease process. Thus, it is important to
treat secondary infections before biopsies are performed.
Glucocorticoid therapy can drastically alter inflammatory conditions and can rapidly
deplete tissue eosinophils. Thus, It is important to stop glucocorticoid therapy for 2 to 3
weeks (oral) or 6 to 8 weeks (repository injections) before biopsying.
Excisional biopsy with a scalpel is often indicated (1) for larger lesions; (2) for
vesicles, bullae, and pustules (the rotary and shearing action of a punch may damage the
lesion); and (3) for suspected disease of the subcutaneous fat (punches often fail to deliver
diseased fat).
Skin biopsy is usually easily and rapidly accomplished using physical restraint and local
anesthesia. The sites are gently clipped (if needed). Clippers should not touch the skin
surface, especially when disorders of keratinization are suspected, because the surface
keratin can be removed. The veterinarian is careful not to remove surface keratin, and the
surface is left untouched or gently cleaned by daubing or soaking with a solution of 70%
alcohol. The sites should not be prepared with other antiseptics (e.g., iodophors). Under
no circumstances should biopsy sites be scrubbed. Such endeavors remove important
surface pathologic changes and create iatrogenic inflammatory lesions. Sites that are being
licked or scratched by the animal can have traumatic artifacts.
After the surface has air dried, the desired lesion is undermined with an appropriate
amount, usually 1 to 2 ml, of local anesthetic (1% to 2% lidocaine) injected subcutaneously through a 25-gauge needle. An exception to this procedure is made when disease of
the fat is suspected, in which case ring blocks, or regional or general anesthesia should be
used, because injection into fat distorts the tissues. The local injection of lidocaine stings,
and some animals object strenuously. The desired lesion is then punched or excised,
including the underlying fat. In one study." 1% lidocaine was found to be superior to 1%
lidocaine with epinephrine or a prilocaine cream applied topically.
It is important to remember that lidocaine inhibits various gram-positive (including
coagulase-positive Staphylococcus) and gram-negative (including Pseudomonas) bacteria,
mycobacteria, and fungi.51 Bicarbonate and epinephrine do the same.?' Thus, if a culture
is going to be obtained from the biopsy specimen, it is advisable to use a ring block, or
regional or general anesthesia.
Great care should be exercised when manipulating the biopsy specimen, avoiding the
use of forceps and instead using tiny mosquito hemostats, Adson thumb forceps, or the
syringe needle through which the local anesthetic was injected. One cruciate (crisscross)
suture effectively closes defects produced by 6-mm biopsy punches. One or two simple
interrupted sutures may also be placed.
COMPLICATIONS OF SKIN BIOPSY
Complications after skin biopsy are rare. Caution should be exercised when performing
biopsy on patients with bleeding disorders, including patients taking aspirin and anticoagulants. The administration of such medication should be stopped, if possible, for 1 to 2
weeks before biopsy. Problems with wound healing should be anticipated in patients with
hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism, in patients with various collagen defects (such

Diagnostic Methods • 129
as cutaneous asthenia), and in patients taking glucocorticoids or antimitotic drugs. The
administration of such drugs should be stopped 2 to 3 weeks before biopsy, if possible.
Wound infections are rare.
Caution should be exercised when injecting lidocaine, which may contain epinephrine,
near extremities (ear tips, digits, and so forth); into patients with impaired circulation,
cardiovascular disease, or hypertension; or into patients receiving phenothiazines, l3-adrenergic receptor blockers, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (e.g., amitraz), or tricyclic antidepressants. Finally, one should be careful of the total amount of lidocaine injected into
small kittens and puppies, because it can produce myocardial depression, muscle twitching, neurotoxicity, and death. One should not exceed a dose of 0.5 ml per kitten or puppy.
Seizures have been induced when 0.5 ml of lidocaine has been injected subcutaneously on
the head of small dogs or kittens.

WHAT TO DO WITH THE BIOPSY SPECIMEN
Skin biopsy specimens should be gently blotted to remove artifactual blood. In most
instances, the fixative of choice is 10% neutral phosphate buffered formalin (100 ml of
40% formaldehyde, 900 ml of tap water, 4 g of acid sodium phosphate monohydrate, and
6.5 g of anhydrous disodium phosphate). It is not stable and oxidizes to formic acid, which
can be seen histologically by the formation of acid hematin in blood cells. Also, the ratio
of formalin to tissue is important, with a minimum of 10 parts formalin to 1 part tissue
being necessary for adequate rapid fixation. Freezing should also be avoided; this sometimes occurs when samples are mailed in the winter months.l'' Freezing can be prevented
by adding 95% ethyl alcohol as 10% of the fixative volume, or by allowing at least 12
hours of fixation before cold exposure.
Fixation in formalin also causes sample shrinkage, which is not a problem with 4-mm
punch biopsy specimens. Larger punch biopsy specimens and elliptic excisions should be
placed subcutis side down on a piece of wooden tongue depressor or cardboard to
minimize the artifacts induced by shrinkage. They should be gently pressed flat for 30 to
60 seconds to facilitate adherence. Placing the specimens on a flat surface allows proper
anatomic orientation and prevents potentially drastic artifacts associated with curling and
folding. The specimen and its adherent splint are then immersed in fixative within 1 to 2
minutes, because artifactual changes develop rapidly in room air.
Also, formalin rapidly penetrates only about 1 em of tissue. Samples larger than 1 em
should be partially transected at I-cm intervals. This most commonly becomes important
when large nodules and tumors are excised and submitted for histopathologic evaluation.
The last critical consideration is deciding where to send a skin biopsy specimen.
Obviously, the clinician wants to send it to someone who can provide the most information. The choices should be ordered as follows: (1) a veterinary pathologist specializing in
dermatopathology, (2) a veterinary dermatologist with a special interest and expertise in
dermatohistopathology, (3) a general veterinary pathologist, and (4) a physician dermatopathologist with a special interest in comparative dermatopathology.
The clinician frequently does not provide adequate information concerning skin biopsy specimens. The clinician and the pathologist are a diagnostic team, and an accurate
diagnosis is more likely (and the patient is best served) when both members of the team
do their part. A concise description of the history, the physical examination findings, the
results of laboratory examinations and therapeutic trials, and the clinician's differential
diagnosis should always accompany the biopsy specimen.

TISSUE STAINS
Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain is most widely used routinely for skin biopsies. In
the laboratory of two of the authors (DWS and WHM), acid orcein-Giemsa (AOG) stain
is also used regularly for skin biopsies. The routine use of AOG markedly reduces the
need for ordering special stains (Table 2-7). Table 2-8 contains guidelines for the use of
various special stains.

130 • Diagnostic Methods

• Tahle 2-7

STAINING CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS
CUTANEOUS COMPONENTS WITH ACID
ORCEIN-GIEMSA STAIN
TEST COMPONENT

COLOR

Nuclei
Cytoplasm of keratinocytes
Cytoplasm of smooth muscle cells
Keratin
Collagen
Elastin
Mast cell granules
Some acid mucopolysaccharides
Melanin
Hemosiderin
Erythrocytes
Eosinophil granules
Cytoplasm of histiocytes, lymphocytes, and fibrocytes
Cytoplasm of neutrophils
Cytoplasm of plasma cells
Amyloid
Hyaline
Fibrin and fibrinoid
Keratohyalin
Trichohyalin
Bacteria, fungal spores, and hyphae
Serum

Dark blue
Blue-purple
Light blue
Blue
Pink
Dark brown to black
Purple
Purple
Dark green to black
Yellow-brown to green
Green-orange
Red
Light blue
Clear to light blue
Dark blue to gray-blue
Sky blue to gray-blue
Pink
Green-blue
Dark blue
Red
Dark blue
Light blue

ARTIFACTS
Even the best dermatohistopathologist cannot read an inadequate, poorly preserved,
poorly fixed, or poorly processed specimen.P: 24, 54 Numerous artifacts can be produced by
errors in site selection, preparation, technique in taking and handling and fixation and
processing of skin biopsy specimens. It is important that the clinician and the pathologist
be cognizant of these potentially disastrous distortions.
• Table 2-8

STAINING CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS
SUBSTANCES WITH SPECIAL STAINS

STAIN

TISSUE AND COLOR

van Cieson's

Mature collagen-red; immature collagen, keratin, muscle, and nervesyellow
Mature collagen-blue; immature collagen, keratin, muscle, and nervesred
Elastin and nuclei-black
Elastin, suflated acid mucopolysaccharides, and certain epithelial mucinspurple
Lipids-dark red
Lipids-green-black
Lipids-red
Reticulin, melanin, and nerves-dark brown to black
Glycogen, neutral mucopolysaccharides, fungi, and tissue debris- red
Acid mucopolysaccharides- blue
Acid mucopolysaccharides-blue
Acid mucopolysaccharides and mast cell granules-purple
Fungi and melanin-black
Gram-positive bacteria-blue
Gram-negative bacteria-red
Acid-fast bacteria- red
Premelanin and melanin-black (hemosiderin usually positive too, but less
intense)

Masson trichrome
Verhoeff's
Comori's aldehyde fuchsin
Oil red O·
Sudan black B·
Scarlet red"
Comori's or Wilder's reticulin
Periodic acid- Schiff
Alcian blue
Hale's colloidal iron
Toluidine blue
Comori's methenamine silver
Gram's or Brown-Brenn
Fite's modified acid-fast
Fontana's ammoniacal silver nitrate

'Require frozen sections of fonnalin-fixed tissue.

Diagnostic Methods • 131

FIGURE 2-32. Electrodesiccation. Note how epidermal keratinocytes are vertically elongated, giving the appearance of standing at
attention.

1. Artifacts due to improper site selection include excoriations and other physico-

chemical effects (e.g., maceration, inflammation, necrosis, and staining abnormalities caused by topical medicaments).
2. Artifacts due to improper preparation include inflammation, staining abnormalities,
and removal of surface pathologic changes (from surgical scrubbing and the use of
antiseptics), as well as collagen separation, pseudoedema, and pseudosinus formation (due to intradermal injection of local anesthetic).
3. Artifacts due to improper technique in taking and handling include pseudovesicles,
pseudoclefts, and shearing (caused by a dull punch or poor technique); pseudopapillomas or pseudonodules, pseudosclerosis, pseudosinuses, pseudocysts, and lobules of sebaceous glands within hair follicles, on the skin surface, or both (squeeze
artifacts due to intervention with forceps); marked dehydration, elongation, and
polarization of cells and cell nuclei (due to electrodesiccation) (Fig. 2-32); and
intercellular edema, clefts, and vesicles (due to friction).
4. Artifacts caused by improper fixation and processing include dermoepidermal separation, intracellular edema, and fractures (due to autolysis); shrinkage, curling, and
folding (due to failure to use wooden or cardboard splints); intracellular edema,
subepidermal vacuolar alteration, and multinucleate epidermal giant cells (from
freezing); formalin pigment in blood vessels and extravascular phagocytes (due to
the use of nonbuffered formalin); hardening, shrinkage, and loss of cellular detail
(from alcohol in the fixative); poor staining and soft, easily displaced, and distorted
tissue (with Bouin's solution); thick, fragmented sections (due to inadequate dehydration during tissue processing); pseudoacanthosis (in tangential sections associated with poor orientation of the specimen); and dermoepidermal separation and
displacement of dermal tissues into epidermis (attributable to cutting sections from
dermis to epidermis).

• THE VOCABULARY OF DERMATOHISTOPATHOLOGY
Dermatopathology is a specialty of medicine requiring many hours of training and many
more of experience to master. It is beyond the scope of this book to train the student
adequately in both dermatology and dermatopathology. However, because dermatopathologic examination is the single most valuable laboratory aid to the dermatologist, it is
important to understand the vocabulary of the dermatopathologist.
Dermatohistopathology has a specialized vocabulary, because many of the histopathologic changes are unique to the skin. Unfortunately, as is true of most sciences, the

132 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-33. Marked orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a dog with ichthyosis.

dennatologic and general medical literatures abound with confusing and sometimes inappropriate dermatohistopathologic terms. The following discussion of terms is based on an
amalgamation of such considerations as precision of definition, descriptive value, popular
usage, historical precedent, and diagnostic significance in dermatohistopathology.i" 50,54

Epidermal Changes

HYPERKERATOSIS
Hyperkeratosis is an increased thickness of the stratum corneum. It may be absolute (an
actual increase in thickness, which is most common) or relative (an apparent increase due
to thinning of the underlying epidermis, which is rare). The types of hyperkeratosis are
further specified by the adjectives orthokeratotic, or anuclear (Fig, 2-33), and parakeratotic, or nucleated (Fig. 2-34). Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratoses are commonly, but less precisely, referred to as orthokeratosis and parakeratosis, respectively.
Other adjectives commonly used to describe further the nature of hyperkeratosis include
basketweave (e.g., dermatophytosis and endocrinopathic conditions) (Fig. 2-35A), compact
(e.g., chronic low-grade trauma and cutaneous horns) (see Fig. 2-35B), and laminated
(e.g., ichthyosis) (see Fig. 2-35C). Hyperkeratosis is usually found in conjunction with
epidermal hyperplasia. If it occurs without epidermal hyperplasia, disorders of keratinization, corneocyte adhesion, or endocrine dermatoses should be considered.
Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis may be seen as alternating layers in
the stratum corneum. This observation implies episodic changes in epidermopoiesis. If the
changes are generalized, the lesions appear as horizontal layers. If the changes are focal,
the lesion is a vertical defect in the stratum corneum. Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis are common, nondiagnostic findings in virtually any chronic dermatosis.
They Simply imply altered epidermopoiesis, whether inflammatory, hormonal, neoplastic,
or developmental. However, diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis suggests ectoparasitism,
zinc-responsive dermatosis, lethal acrodermatitis, Malassezia dermatitis, some vitamin Aresponsive dermatoses, thallotoxicosis, generic dog food dermatosis, necrolytic migratory
erythema, hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis of Labrador retrievers, and occasionally, dermatophytosis and dermatophilosis. Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis that targets hair follicles suggests follicular inflammatory diseases and congenital follicular parakeratosis of Rottweilers
and Siberian huskies. Parakeratotic hyperkeratosis associated with subjacent superficial

Diagnostic Methods • 133

FIGURE 2-34. Marked parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis in a dog with necrolytic migratOIy erythema.

epidermal pallor suggests zinc-responsive dermatosis, lethal acrodermatitis, thallotoxicosis,
and necrolytic migratory erythema.
Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis overlying epidermal papillae (parakeratotic "caps")
in which the subjacent dermal papillae are edematous (papillary "squirting") is seen in
primary idiopathic seborrheic dermatitis and zinc-responsive dermatoses of dogs (Fig.
2-36).
Diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis suggests endocrinopathies, nutritional deficiencies, secondary seborrheas, and developmental abnormalities (ichthyosis, epidermal nevus,
follicular dysplasia, and color dilution alopecia). Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis that is disproportionately severe in hair follicles (Fig. 2-37) suggests vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, vitamin A deficiency, acne, Schnauzer comedo syndrome, follicular dysplasia, sebaceous adenitis, actinic follicular keratosis, comedo nevus, and follicular cyst.

HYPOKERATOSIS
The decreased thickness of the stratum corneum, called hypokeratosis, is much less
common than hyperkeratosis and reflects an exceptionally rapid epidermal turnover time,
decreased cohesion between cells of the stratum corneum, or both. Hypokeratosis may be
found in seborrheic and other exfoliative skin disorders, and in feline paraneoplastic

134 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-35. A, Basketweave orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a cushingoid cat. B, Compact orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a cutaneous hom form a cat. C, Laminated orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in an ichthyotic cat.

alopecia. It may also be produced by excessive surgical preparation of the biopsy site or
by friction and maceration in intertriginous areas.

HYPERGRANULOSIS AND HYPOGRANULOSIS
The terms hypergranulosis and hypogranulosis indicate, respectively, an increase and a
decrease in the thickness of the stratum granulosum. Both entities are common and
nondiagnostic. Hypergranulosis may be seen in any dermatosis in which there is epidermal
hyperplasia and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 2-38). Hypogranulosis is often seen in
dermatoses in which there is parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and is most easily appreciated in
the footpads and the nasal planum.

HYPERPLASIA
An increased thickness of the noncornified epidermis due to an increased number of
epidermal cells is called hyperplasia. The term acanthosis is often used interchangeably
with hyperplasia. However, acanthosis specifically indicates an increased thickness of the
stratum spinosum and may be due to hyperplasia (true acanthosis, which is the most
common) or hypertrophy (pseudoacanthosis, which is uncommon). Epidermal hyperplasia
is often accompanied by rete ridge formation (irregular hyperplasia resulting in pegs of
epidermis that appear to project downward into the underlying dermis). Rete ridges are
not found in normal-haired skin of dogs and cats. Mitotic figures, virtually never seen in
normal epidermis, are common in hyperplastic lesions.
The following adjectives further specify the types of epidermal hyperplasia: (1) irregular-uneven, elongated, pointed rete ridges with an obliterated or preserved rete-papilla

Diagnostic Methods • 135

FIGURE 2-36. Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a
dog. Note squirting papilla (lower arrow) with
parakeratotic cap (upper arrow).

configuration; (2) regular-approximately evenly thickened epidermis (Fig. 2-39); (3)
psoriasiform-approximately evenly elongated rete ridges, which are clubbed, fused, or
both at their bases (Fig. 2-40), often with thinning of the suprapillary epidermis, which
may contain microabscesses and be parakeratotic; (4) papillated-digitate projections of
the epidermis above the skin surface (Fig. 2-41); and (5) pseudocarcinomatous (pseudoepitheliomatous)-extreme, irregular hyperplasia, which may include increased mitoses,
squamous eddies, and hom pearls, thus resembling squamous cell carcinoma; however,
cellular atypia is absent, and the basement membrane zone is not breached (Fig. 2-42).
These five forms of epidermal hyperplasia may be seen in various combinations in the
same specimen.
Epidermal hyperplasia is a common, nondiagnostic feature of virtually any chronic
inflammatory process. The five types are generally useful descriptively but have little
specific diagnostic significance. Pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia is most commonly associated with underlying dermal suppurative, granulomatous, or neoplastic processes and with
chronic ulcers. Papillated hyperplasia is most commonly seen with neoplasia, callosities,
epidermal nevi, primary seborrhea, and zinc-responsive dermatosis. Psoriasiform hyperplasia is most commonly seen with epitheliotropic lymphoma, psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, parapsoriasis, and chronically traumatized lesions (e.g.,
chronic allergy and acral lick dermatitis).

HYPOPLASIA AND ATROPHY

Hypoplasia is a decreased thickness of the noncornified epidermis due to a decrease in
the number of cells. Atrophy is a decreased thickness of the noncomified epidermis due

136 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-37. Disproportionate hair follicle
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a dog with vitamin
A-responsive dermatosis.

to a decrease in the size of cells (Fig. 2-43). An early sign of epidermal hypoplasia or
atrophy is the loss of the rete ridges in areas of skin where they are normally present (i.e.,
in the nonhaired skin of dogs and cats).
Epidermal hypoplasia and atrophy are uncommon in skin diseases of dogs and cats
but are occasionally seen with hormonal (usually hyperadrenocorticism, rarely hypothyroidism), developmental (cutaneous asthenia, feline acquired skin fragility), and inflammatory
(discoid lupus erythematosus, traction alopecia, dermatomyositis, vaccine-induced vasculitis) dermatoses.
NECROSIS, DYSKERATOSIS, APOPTOSIS, AND ONeOSIS

The term necrosis refers to the death of cells or tissues in a living organism and is judged
to be present primarily on the basis of nuclear morphologic findings. The term necrolysis
is often used synonymously with necrosis but actually implies a separation of tissue due to
the death of cells (e.g., toxic epidermal necrolysis). Nuclear changes indicative of necrosis
include karyorrhexis (nuclear fragmentation), pyknosis (nuclear shrinkage and consequent
hyperchromatism), and karyolysis (nuclear ghosts). With all three necrotic nuclear
changes, individual keratinocytes are characterized by loss of intercellular bridges and
cytoplasmic changes of condensation, intense eosinophilia, loss of structure, and fragmentation. Necrosis is further specified by the adjectives coagulation (preservation of cell
outlines but loss of cell detail) or caseation (complete loss of all structural details, the
tissue being replaced by a granular material containing nuclear debris).
In fact, cell death and necrosis are different. 29 , 33 Cell death-defined functionally by
the point of no return-occurs long before necrosis, and is not detectable histologically.

Diagnostic Methods • 137

FIGURE 2-38. Hypergranulosis in a dog with ichthyosis.

Necrosis refers to changes that occur secondary to cell death by any mechanism (e.g.,
apoptosis, oncosis), and is histologically visible.
Epidermal necrosis may be focal as a result of cutaneous adverse drug reaction (Fig.
2-44), microbial infections, or various lichenoid dermatoses (e.g. erythema multiforme),
or it may be generalized as a result of physicochemical trauma (primary irritant contact
dermatitis, burns, freezing, and thallotoxicosis), interference with blood supply (vasculitis,
thromboembolism, subepidermal bullae, and dense subepidermal cellular infiltrates), or an
immunologic mechanism (toxic epidermal necrolysis and erythema multiforme). So-called
"satellite cell necrosis" (satellitosis) is actually a misnomer.w 33 It is really satellite cell
apoptosis. Individual apoptotic keratinocytes are seen in association with contiguous (satellite) lymphoid cells (Fig, 2-45). Satellitosis can be seen in a number of interface dermatitides, including erythema multiforme, lupus erythematosus and graft-versus-host disease.
The term dyskeratosis is used to indicate a premature and faulty keratinization of
individual cells. The term is also used, although less commonly, to indicate a general fault
in the keratinization process and thus in the state of the epidermis as a whole. Dyskeratotic cells are characterized by eosinophilic, swollen cytoplasm with normal or condensed,
dark-staining nuclei. Such cells are difficult or impossible to distinguish from apoptotic or
necrotic keratinocytes on light microscopic examination. The judgment usually depends on
whether the rest of the epithelium is thought to be keratinizing or necrosing. Noone has
been able to define the term "dyskeratosis" consistently, in a way satisfactory to everyone,
Simply because the original concepts on which the designation was based were faulty."

138 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-39. Regular epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with atopy.

Most of the keratinocytes previously referred to as being dyskeratotic were actually apoptotic.I? If this term is used at all, it should be reserved for the so-called "corps ronds"
(round bodies) that typify two human dermatoses-Darier's disease and transient acantholytic dermatosis (Grover's disease)-and are also seen in warty dyskeratoma, squamous
cell carcinoma, and keratoacanthoma.P
Apoptosis is a form of intentional suicide based on a genetic mechanism.w 33 Programmed cell death and apoptosis are not identical, but genetic programming is involved
in both. In programmed (spontaneous) cell death, there is an internal "clock" that specifies the fixed time for physiologic cell suicide. In apoptosis, genetic programming specifies

FIGURE 2-40. Psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with atopy.

Diagnostic Methods • 139

FIGURE 2-41. Papillated epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with zinc-responsive dermatosis.
There is also diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

the weapons (the means) to produce instant suicide. Apoptosis can be activated by many
stimuli: growth factors, cytokines, hormones, immune system, viruses, and sublethal damage to cells. Apoptotic keratinocytes are common features of interface dermatoses (Fig. 246), but they may be seen in small numbers (up to six in a section through a 6-mm punch
specimen) in virtually any hyperplastic epidermis. Apoptotic keratinocytes are rarely seen
(one or two in a section through a 6-mm punch specimen) in normal epidermis. However,

FIGURE 2-42. Pseudocarcinomatous epidermal hyperplasia in a dog with acral lick dermatitis.

140 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-43. Epidermal atrophy in a dog with a sex hormone dermatosis.

apoptotic keratinocytes are numerous in the catagen and early telogen hair follicle epithelium. Cytotoxic drugs produce keratinocyte apoptosis, with phase-specific agents tending to
target the basal cell layer, and noncycle phase-specific agents affecting all epithelial
layers.
Apoptotic keratinocytes undergo a series of morphologic changes: the cell shrinks,
becomes denser and more eosinophilic, and loses its normal contacts; nuclear changes
include pyknosis, margination of chromatin, and karyorrhexis; the cell emits processes
("buds") that often contain nuclear fragments and organelles, and that do not swell; these
buds often break off and become apoptotic bodies, which may be phagocytosed by
macrophages or neighboring cells, or remain free. There is no swelling of mitochondria or
other organelles. Synonyms for apoptotic keratinocytes include Civatte bodies (when in
the stratum basale) and "sunburn cells" (when caused by ultraviolet radiation). Synonyms
for apoptotic bodies include "colloid", "hyaline", "filamentous", and "ovoid" bodies. Apoptosis may be more specifically detected in routinely processed and fixed skin specimens by
the terminal uridinyl transferase nick end labeling (TUNEL) method."
Oncosis is cell death as a result of overwhelming damage (e.g., ischemia, toxins,
chemical injury), and is characterized by cellular swelling, organelle swelling, blebbing
(blister-like cell membrane structures that do not contain cell organelles, and that may
swell and rupture) and increased membrane permeability.t" 33 Oncosis and necrosis induce
an inflammatory response, whereas apoptosis does not.

INTERCELLULAR EDEMA
Intercellular edema (spongiosis) of the epidermis is characterized by a widening of the
intercellular spaces with accentuation of the intercellular bridges, giving the involved
epidermis a spongy appearance (Fig. 2-47). Severe intercellular edema may lead to
rupture of the intercellular bridges and the formation of spongiotic vesicles within the
epidermis. Severe spongiotic vesicle formation may, in tum, cause blowout of the basement membrane zone in some areas, giving the appearance of subepidermal vesicles.
Intercellular edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any acute or subacute
inflammatory dermatosis. Diffuse spongiosis, which also involves the outer root sheath of
hair follicles, may be seen with feline eosinophilic plaque, feline eosinophilic granuloma,

Diagnostic Methods • 141

FIGURE 2-44. Full-thickness necrosis of the epidermis and outer root sheath of a hair follicle in a
dog with erythema multiforme.

FIGURE 2-45. Satellitosis (satellite cell apoptosis) in a dog with erythema multiforme.
Note the lymphocyte attached to an apoptotic keratinocyte (arrow).

142 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-46. Two apoptotic basal epidermal cells and a thickened basement membrane
zone in a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.

seborrheic dermatitis, Malassezia dermatitis, zinc-responsive dermatoses, and thallotoxicosis. Spongiosis of the upper one half of the epidermis, which is overlaid by marked
diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, is seen in necrolytic migratory erythema. Spongiosis
of the upper half of the epidermis with superficial epidermal necrosis may be seen with
contact irritant dermatitis.
INTRACELLULAR EDEMA

Intracellular edema (hydropic degeneration, vacuolar degeneration, and ballooning degeneration) of the epidermis is characterized by increased cell size, cytoplasmic pallor, and
displacement of the nucleus to the periphery of affected cells (Fig. 2-48). Severe intracellular edema may result in reticular degeneration and intraepidermal vesicles.
Intracellular edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any acute or subacute
inflammatory dermatosis. Caution must be exercised not to confuse intracellular edema
with freezing artifact (Fig. 2-49), delayed fixation artifact, or the intracellular accumulation of glycogen that is seen in the outer root sheath of normal hair follicles and results
from epidermal injury. In addition, one can see individual keratinocytes with condensed,
pyknotic nuclei surrounded by a clear vesicular space and a rim of homogeneous cytoplasm in a number of dermatoses." These epidermal "clear cells" are artifacts due to
occlusion, moisture in intertriginous areas, and other unknown factors.
RETICULAR DEGENERATION
Reticular degeneration is caused by severe intracellular edema of epidermal cells in which
the cells burst, resulting in multilocular intraepidermal vesicles in which septa are formed
by resistant cell walls (Fig. 2-50). It may be seen with any acute or subacute inflammatory dermatosis but especially dermatophilosis and acute contact dermatitis.
BALLOONING DEGENERATION
Ballooning degeneration (koilocytosis) is a specific type of degenerative change seen in
epidermal cells and characterized by swollen eosinophilic to lightly basophilic cytoplasm
without vacuolization, by enlarged or condensed and occasionally multiple nuclei, and by a

Diagnostic Methods • 143

FIGURE 2-47. Spongiosis in a dog
with contact dermatitis. There is also lymphocytic exocytosis.

loss of cohesion resulting in acantholysis (Fig. 2-51). Ballooning degeneration is a specific
feature of viral infections.

HYDROPIC DEGENERATION
Hydropic degeneration (liquefaction degeneration or vacuolar alteration) of the basal epidermal cells describes intracellular edema restricted to cells of the stratum basale (Fig. 252). This process may also affect the basal cells of the outer root sheath of hair follicles.
Hydropic degeneration of basal cells is usually focal but, if severe and extensive, may
result in intrabasal or subepidermal clefts or vesicles owing to dermo-epidermal separation. Hydropic degeneration of basal cells is an uncommon finding and is usually associated with lupus erythematosus, idiopathic lichenoid dermatoses, adverse cutaneous drug
reactions, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme, dermatomyositis, thymomaassociated exfoliative dermatitis of cats, various vasculopathies, and lichenoid keratoses.
ACANTHOLYSIS
A loss of cohesion between epidermal cells, resulting in intraepidermal clefts, vesicles, and
bullae (Fig. 2-53), is known as acantholysis (dyshesion, dermolysis, or desmorrhexis). Free
epidermal cells in the vesicles are called acantholytic keratinocytes or "acanthocytes" (Fig.

144 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-48. Intracellular edema (arrow) in a dog with contact dermatitis.

FIGURE 2-49. Freezing artifact. Note that
keratinocytes are vacuolated at all levels of the
epidermis and hair follicle outer root sheath with
no accompanying intercellular edema, exocytosis
of inflammatory cells, or dermal inflammation.

Diagnostic Methods • 145

FIGURE 2-50. Reticular degeneration in a dog with contact dermatitis,

2-54). This process may also involve the outer root sheath of hair follicles and glandular
ductal epithelium. Acantholysis is further specified by reference to the level at which it
occurs (e.g., subcomeal, intragranular, intraepidermal, and suprabasilar). Acantholytic keratinocytes are rounded, their nucleus is morphologically normal, and their cytoplasm is
normally stained or hypereosinophilic.
Acantholysis is most commonly associated with the pemphigus complex due to autoantibodies against desmoglein or other cellular adhesion molecules. However, other causes
of acantholysis are severe spongiosis (with any acute or subacute inflammatory dermatosis),

FIGURE 2-51. Hyperplasia and ballooning degeneration of the epidermis and intracytoplasmic inclusions (arrow) in a cat with feline poxvirus infection.

146 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-52. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells in a dog with dermatomyositis. (From Scott DW, Schultz RD: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex in the collie dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 171:721, 1977.)

FIGURE 2-53. Suprabasilar cleft and intraepidermal vesicles containing acantholytic cells.
(Courtesy A. A. Stannard.)

Diagnostic Methods • 147

FIGURE 2-54. Acantholytic keratinocytes from a case of canine pemphigus foliaceus.

ballooning degeneration (in viral infection), proteolytic enzymes released by neutrophils
(in bacterial and fungal dermatoses-" and subcorneal pustular dermatosis) or eosinophils
(in sterile eosinophilic pustulosis), developmental defects (benign familial pemphigus), and
neoplastic transformation (squamous cell carcinoma, actinic keratosis, and warty dyskeratoma).

EXOCYTOSIS AND DIAPEDESIS
The term exocytosis refers to the migration of inflammatory cells, erythrocytes, or both
through the intercellular spaces of the epidermis (Fig. 2-55). Exocytosis of inflammatory
cells is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any inflammatory dermatosis. When the
condition involves eosinophils in combination with spongiosis, it is often referred to as
eosinophilic spongiosis and may be seen in ectoparasitism, pemphigus, pemphigoid, sterile
eosinophilic pustulosis, eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic granuloma, hypereosinophilic syndrome, and some cases of contact hypersensitivity. Lymphocytic exocytosis occurs in
interface dermatoses (e.g., lupus erythematosus), Malassezia dermatitis, atopy, contact
hypersensitivity, seborrheic disorders, and some ectoparasitisms. Multinucleated histiocytic
giant cells are rarely seen within the epidermis (e.g., adverse cutaneous drug reaction).
Diapedesis occurs when erythrocytes are present in the intercellular spaces of the
epidermis. Diapedesis of erythrocytes implies loss of vascular integrity and may be seen
whenever superficial dermal inflammation and vascular dilatation and engorgement are
pronounced or when vasculitis or coagulation defects occur. These intraepidermal erythrocytes can be phagocytosed by keratinocytes."

CLEFTS
The slitlike spaces known as clefts (lacunae), which do not contain fluid, occur within the
epidermis or at the dermoepidermal junction. Clefts may be caused by acantholysis or
hydropic degeneration of basal cells (Max Joseph spaces; Fig. 2-56). However, they may
also be caused by mechanical trauma and tissue retraction associated with obtaining,
fixing, and processing biopsy specimens.

148 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-55. Exocytosis of leukocytes through the epidermis in a dog with scabies.

Artifactual dermoepidermal separation is fairly commonly observed at the margin of a
biopsy specimen. In general, only tissue weakened through the dermoepidermal junction
will separate in this manner during processing. Thus, this "usable artifact" may be valid
evidence of basal cell or basement membrane damage. Spurious separation is characterized by clefting at different anatomic sites within the same specimen (Fig. 2-57) and
evidence of tissue trauma (e.g., tom cytoplasm and fibers, bare cellular nuclei).

FIGURE 2-56. Intrabasal cleft (arrow) in a dog with dermatomyositis.

Diagnostic Methods • 149

FIGURE 2-57. Artifactual clefts.
Inflammatory dermatosis in a dog.
Artifactual clefts occur in numerous directions (horizontally and
vertically), at numerous levels (suprabasilar, intraepidermal, dermoepidermal), and are associated with
ripping and tearing of cells (cytoplasmic, nuclear).

MICROVESICLES, VESICLES, AND BULLAE
Microvesicles (Fig. 2-58), vesicles, and bullae are microscopic and macroscopic, fluidfilled, relatively acellular spaces within or below the epidermis. Vesicles and bullae are
often loosely referred to as blisters. These lesions may be caused by severe intercellular or
intracellular edema, ballooning degeneration, acantholysis, hydropic degeneration of basal
cells, subepidermal edema, or other factors resulting in dermoepidermal separation (e.g.,
the autoantibodies in bullous pemphigoid). Microvesicles, vesicles, and bullae may thus be
further described by their location as subcomeal, intragranular, intraepidermal, suprabasilar, intrabasal, or subepidermal. When these lesions contain larger numbers of inflammatory cells, they are referred to as vesicopustules.

MICROABSCESSES AND PUSTULES
Microabscesses and pustules are microscopic or macroscopic intraepidermal and subepidermal cavities filled with inflammatory cells (Fig. 2-59), which can be further described
on the basis of location and cell type as follows:

FIGURE 2-58. Intraepidermal
microvesicle in a dog with food hypersensitivity.

150 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-59. Microabscesses are observed in many dermatoses. This photomicrograph
illustrates microabscesses containing many eosinophils located within the epidermis. (Courtesy J.
D. Conroy.)

1. Spongiform pustule (of Kogoj) (Fig. 2-60) is a multilocular accumulation of neu-

trophils within and between keratinocytes, especially those of the stratum granulosum and the stratum spinosum, in which cell boundaries form a spongelike
network. It is seen in microbial infections and occasionally in canine subcomeal
pustular dermatosis, linear IgA pustular dermatosis, and superficial suppurative
necrolytic dermatitis of Schnauzers.
2. Munro's microabscess (Fig. 2-61) is a small, desiccated accumulation of neutro-

FIGURE 2-60. Spongiform microabscess in the epidermis of a dog with staphylococcal
folliculitis.

Diagnostic Methods • I 5 I

FIGURE 2-61. Munro's microabscess in the superficial epidermis of a dog with seborrheic dermatitis.

phils within or below the stratum corneum, which is seen in microbial infections,
seborrheic disorders, and psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer
spaniels.
3. Pautrier microabscess (Fig. 2-62A) is a small, focal accumulation of abnormal
lymphoid cells, which is seen in epitheliotropic lymphomas.
4. EOSinophilic microabscess (see Fig. 2-59) is a lesion seen in ectoparasitism, eosinophilic granuloma, eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic folliculitis, sterile eosinophilic
pustulosis, bullous pemphigoid, the pemphigus complex, feline allergy, canine
atopy, contact hypersensitivity, and with Malassezia dermatitis.
5. Small spongiotic foci containing normal mononuclear cells (see Fig. 2-62B) are
occasionally seen in atopy, contact hypersensitivity, and seborrheic disorders. In
canine atopy, some or all of these cells may be Langerhans' cells.

HYPERPIGMENTATION
Hyperpigmentation (hypermelanosis) refers to excessive amounts of melanin deposited
within the epidermis and often concurrently in dermal melanophages. Hyperpigmentation
may be focal or diffuse and may be confined to the stratum basale or present throughout
all epidermal layers (Fig. 2-63). It is a common, nondiagnostic finding in chronic inflammatory and hormonal dermatoses as well as in some developmental and neoplastic disorders. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation is a common consequence of inflammatory
insults. Increased melanin may be present in the epidermis (within keratinocytes) anclJor
dermis (within melanophages). The pathomechanism is unclear but could include epidermal injury and melanin fallout through a damaged basement membrane. Interferons

152 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-62. A, Pautrier microabscess in the lower epidermis of a dog with epitheliotropic lymphoma. B, Small intraepidermal microabscess containing lymphocytes and Langerhans' cells in an atopic dog.

stimulate melanin formation by melanocytes and may be a key mechanism in cutaneous
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Hyperpigmentation must always be cautiously assessed with regard to the patient's normal pigmentation. Hyperpigmentation of sebaceous
glands with extrusion of linear melanotic casts into hair follicle lumina is seen with
follicular dysplasias or endocrinopathies (Fig. 2-64).14

HYPOPIGMENTATION
Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis) refers to decreased amounts of melanin in the epidermis (Fig. 2-65). The condition may be associated with congenital or acquired idiopathic

Diagnostic Methods • 153

FIGURE 2-63. Epidermal melanosis (hyperpigmentation) in a dog with acanthosis nigricans.

FIGURE 2-64. Sebaceous gland melanosis in
a dog with cyclic follicular dysplasia. Melanin
granules are concentrated into clumps in the sebaceous duct (arrow).

154 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-65. Epidermal hypomelanosis in a dog with vitiligo.
Normal epidermis (right) is heavily
melanized, whereas vitiliginous epidermis (left) is almost devoid of
melanin.

defects in melaninization (e.g., leukoderma and vitiligo), the toxic effects of certain chemicals (e.g., monobenzyl ether of dihydroquinone in rubbers and plastics) on melanocytes,
inflammatory disorders that affect melaninization or destroy melanocytes, hormonal disorders, and dermatoses featuring hydropic degeneration of basal cells (e.g., lupus erythematosus). In the hypopigmented dermatoses associated with hydropic degeneration of basal
cells, the underlying superficial dermis usually reveals pigmentary incontinence.

CRUST
The consolidated, desiccated surface mass called crust is composed of varying combinations of keratin, serum, cellular debris, and often microorganisms. Crusts are further
described on the basis of their composition: (1) serous-mostly serum, (2) herrwrrhagic-

FIGURE 2-66. SeroceIIular crust in a cat with primary irritant contact dermatitis.

Diagnostic Methods • 155

FIGURE 2-67. Acantholytic keratinocytes (arrow) in surface crust
of a dog with pemphigus foliaceus.

mostly blood, (3) cellular-mostly inflammatory cells, (4) serocellular (exudative)-a mixture of serum and inflammatory cells (Fig. 2-66), and (5) palisading-alternating horizontal rows of orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and pus (e.g., in dermatophilosis and dermatophytosis).
Crusts merely indicate a prior exudative process and are rarely of diagnostic significance. However, crusts should always be closely scrutinized, because they may contain the
following important diagnostic clues: (1) dermatophyte spores and hyphae, (2) the filaments and coccoid elements of Dermatophilus congolensis, and (3) large numbers of
acantholytic keratinocytes (in pemphigus complex) (Fig. 2-67). Bacteria and bacterial
colonies are common inhabitants of surface debris and are of no diagnostic significance
(Fig. 2-68).
The presence of yeast in surface debris is more difficult to interpret. Yeasts (M.
pachyderrrwtis) are occasionally seen in surface debris and may be of no diagnostic
significance. 41, 42 However, the pathologist and the clinician should always carefully consider the potential importance of yeast in contributing to dermatitis. Histopathologically,
the presence of surface yeasts accompanied by subjacent epidermal parakeratotic hyper-

FIGURE 2-68. Microcolony of
cocci (arrow) in a surface crust of
a cat with atopy.

156 • Diagnostic Methods

keratosis, spongiosis, and lymphocytic exocytosis is a reaction pattern that strongly suggests
that these organisms are contributing to the clinical dermatitis.P?
DEllS

Dells are small depressions or hollows in the surface of the epidermis. They are usually
associated with focal epidermal atrophy and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. Dells may be
seen in lichenoid dermatoses, especially in lupus erythematosus.
EPIDERMAL COlLARETTE

The term epidermal collarette refers to the formation of elongated, hyperplastic rete
ridges at the lateral margins of a pathologic process that appear to curve inward toward
the center of the lesion. Epidermal collarettes may be seen with neoplastic, granulomatous, and suppurative dermatoses.
HORN CYSTS, PSEUDOHORN CYSTS, HORN PEARLS, AND
SQUAMOUS EDDIES

Hom cysts (keratin cysts) are multiple, small, circular cystic structures that are surrounded
by flattened epidermal cells and that contain concentrically arranged lamellar keratin.
Hom cysts are features of hair follicle neoplasms and basal cell tumors. Pseudohom cysts
are illusory small cystic structures formed by the irregular invagination of a hyperplastic,
hyperkeratotic epidermis. They are seen in numerous hyperplastic or neoplastic epidermal
dermatoses.
Hom pearls (squamous pearls) are focal, circular, concentric layers of squamous cells
showing gradual keratinization toward the center, often accompanied by cellular atypia
and dyskeratosis. Hom pearls are features of squamous cell carcinoma and pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia.
Squamous eddies are whorl-like patterns of squamoid cells with no atypia, dyskeratosis, or central keratinization. Squamous eddies are features of numerous neoplastic and
hyperplastic epidermal disorders.
EPIDERMOlYTIC HYPERKERATOSIS

Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis (granular degeneration) is characterized by (1) perinuclear
clear spaces in the upper epidermis, (2) indistinct cell boundaries formed either by lightly
staining material or by keratohyalin granules peripheral to the perinuclear clear spaces, (3)
a markedly thickened stratum granulosum, and (4) orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. It is seen
in certain types of ichthyosis, epidermal nevi (Fig. 2-69), actinic keratoses, seborrheic
keratoses, papillomas, keratinous cysts, and squamous cell carcinoma.
MAST CEllS IN THE EPITHELIUM AND AT THE BASEMENT
MEMBRANE ZONE

Mast cells are frequently seen within the epidermis and the outer root sheath of the hair
follicle in biopsy specimens from cats with inflammatory dermatoses (Fig. 2-70).40 They
are most commonly found in diseases of allergic or immune-mediated origin, especially
those with tissue eosinophilia. Mast cells are often found in a linear alignment immediately below the basement membrane zone in biopsy specimens from dogs with Malassezia
dermatitis (Fig. 2_71)30 and rarely in other inflammatory dermatoses."

Dermal Changes
COLLAGEN CHANGES

Dermal collagen is subject to a number of pathologic changes and may undergo the
following: (1) hyalinization-a loss of fibrillar structure and amorphous change leading to

Diagnostic Methods • I 57

FIGURE 2-69. Epidermolytlc hyperkeratosis (granular degeneration) in a dog with epidermal nevus.

confluence and an increased eosinophilic, glassy, refractile appearance, as seen in chronic
inflammation, vasculopathies, and connective tissue diseases; (2) fibrinoid degenerationdeposition of or replacement with a brightly eosinophilic fibrillar or granular substance
resembling fibrin, as seen in connective tissue diseases; (3) lysis-a homogeneous, eosinophilic, complete loss of structural detail, as seen in microbial infections and ischemia; (4)
degeneration-a structural and tinctorial change characterized by slight basophilia, granular appearance, and frayed edges of collagen fibers, rarely seen in canine and feline
dermatoses; (5) dystrophic mineralization-deposition of calcium salts as basophilic,
amorphous, granular material along collagen fibers (Fig. 2-72), as seen in hyperadreno-

FIGURE 2-70. Epidermal mast cells (arrows) in a cat with flea bite hypersensitivity.

158 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-71. Linear alignment of mast cells
(arrow) at the basement membrane zone in a
dog with Malassezia dermatitis (AOG stain).

FIGURE 2-72. Dystrophic mineralization of collagen bundles in a
dog with hyperadrenocorticism.

Diagnostic Methods • 159

corticism; (6) atrophy-thin collagen fibrils and decreased fibroblasts, with a resultant
decrease in dermal thickness, as seen in hormonal dermatoses; and (7) dysplasiadisorganization and fragmentation of collagen bundles (Fig. 2-73), as seen in cutaneous
asthenia and feline acquired skin fragility.
A flame figure (Fig. 2-74) is an area of altered collagen surrounded by eosinophils
and eosinophil granules. 21. 22, 52 Collagen fibers are surrounded totally or in part by
eosinophilic material. This material is variable in shape, from annular to oval, to a
radiating configuration resembling the spokes of a wheel ("starburst" appearance). Some
collagen fibers within these areas appear normal, whereas others appear partially or wholly
swollen, irregular or fuzzy in outline, and granular in consistency. The eosinophilic material itself varies from amorphous to granular. In the granular areas, one can see a
transition from intact eosinophils, to eosinophil granules and nuclear debris, to completely
amorphous material. Trichrome-stained sections show the collagen fibers to be normal in
size, surface contour, and consistency.s- 22 Thus, the irregularities, granularity, and fuzziness seen in the H & E-stained sections are due to the coating of collagen fibers with
the eosinophilic material. In humans, electron microscopic studies have revealed no collagen degeneration in flame figures. 52 Immunofluorescence testing identifies eosinophil major basic protein in the amorphous material surrounding and coating collagen fibers. 52 It is
likely that all feline and canine skin lesions previously described as containing "collagen
degeneration," "necrobiotic collagen," or "collagenolysis" actually contained flame figures.
Such conditions include feline and canine eosinophilic granuloma, insect and arthropod
reactions, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and eosinophilic panniculitis.

ELASTIN CHANGES
Atrophy of elastin fibers is seen in dogs with pituitary dwarfism, adult-onset hyposomatotropism, and chronic hyperglucocorticoidism.

FIGURE 2-73. Collagen dysplasia in a dog
with cutaneous asthenia, Note how collagen bundles val)' greatly in size and appear disorganized
and fragmented.

160 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-74. Flame figure. Collagen fibers are surrounded and coated by granular
material from eosinophils,

Solar elastosis appears in H & E-stained sections as a tangle of indistinct amphophilic fibers, often in linear bands running approximately parallel to the surface epidermis,
within the superficial dermis. With Verhoeff's or AGe stain, the tangled, thickened,
elastotic material is clearly seen (Fig. 2-75). Solar elastosis is a rare manifestation of
ultraviolet light-induced skin damage in dogs and cats.

DERMAL DEPOSITS
Amyloid appears in H & E-stained sections as a hyaline, amorphous, lightly eosinophilic
material that tends to displace or obliterate normal structures.
Lipid deposits occur in the dermis in xanthomatosis. In H & E-stained sections,
lightly eosinophilic, feathery deposits separate the collagen bundles to form small "lakes"
of lipid (Fig. 2- 76).
Cholesterol clefts may be seen in xanthomatosis, panniculitis, and ruptured follicular
cysts. They appear as clear spaces in needle or spicule shape (Fig. 2-77).

FIGURE 2-75. Solar elastosis in a dog. A, Tangled, elastotic material (arrow) is occasionally seen in H & E-stained
sections. B, Elastotic material (black) is flagrant in AGG-stained sections.

Diagnostic Methods • 161

FIGURE 2-76. Lipid lakes (arrow) in a xanthoma from a cat.

FIBROPLASIA, DESMOPLASIA, FIBROSIS, AND SCLEROSIS
The term fibroplasia refers to the formation and development of fibrous tissue in increased amounts and is often used synonymously with granulation tissue. The condition is
characterized by a fibrovascular proliferation in which the blood vessels with prominent
endothelial cells are oriented roughly perpendicular to the surface of the skin (Fig. 2-78).
The new collagen fibers, with prominent fibroblasts, are oriented roughly parallel to the
surface of the skin. Edema and inflammatory cells are constant features of fibroplasia.
Desmoplasia is the term usually used when referring to the fibroplasia induced by neoplastic processes.
Fibrosis is a later stage of fibroplasia in which increased numbers of fibroblasts and
collagen fibers are the characteristic findings. Little or no inflammation is present. Alignment of collagen fibers in vertical streaks seen as elongated, thickened parallel strands of
collagen in the superficial dermis, perpendicular to the epidermal surface, is found in
chronically rubbed, licked, or scratched skin, such as that seen with acral lick dermatitis
and hypersensitivity reactions. Sclerosis (scar formation) may be the end point of fibrosis,

FIGURE 2-77. Cholesterol
clefts (arrow) peripheral to a ruptured follicular cyst from a dog.

162 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-78. Fibroplasia subsequent
to vascular infarct in a dog.

in which the increased numbers of collagen fibers have a thick, eosinophilic, hyalinized
appearance, and the number of fibroblasts is greatly reduced.
PAPILLOMATOSIS, VILLI, AND FESTOONS
Papillomatosis refers to the projection of dermal papillae above the surface of the skin,
resulting in an irregular undulating configuration of the epidermis. Often associated with
epidermal hyperplasia, papillomatosis is also seen with chronic inflammatory and neoplastic dermatoses. Papillomatosis and papillate epidermal hyperplasia are often associated
with primary seborrhea and zinc-responsive dermatoses.
Villi are dermal papillae, covered by one or two layers of epidermal cells (Fig. 2-79),
that project into a vesicle or bulla. Villi are seen in pemphigus vulgaris and warty
dyskeratoma and occasionally in actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinoma.
Festoons are dermal papillae, devoid of attached epidermal cells, that project into the
base of a vesicle or a bulla. They are seen in bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa,
and drug-induced pemphigoid.

PIGMENTARY INCONTINENCE
Pigmentary incontinence refers to the presence of melanin granules that are free within
the subepidermal and perifollicular dermis and within dermal macrophages (melanopha-

Diagnostic Methods • 163

FIGURE 2-79. Villi in a cat with pemphigus vulgaris.

ges) (Fig. 2-80). Pigmentary incontinence may be seen with any process that damages the
stratum basale and the basement membrane zone, especially with hydropic degeneration
of basal cells (lichenoid dermatoses, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, and erythema
multiforme). Interestingly, it was seen in 29% of the biopsy specimens from dogs with
Malassezia dermatitis .:so In addition, melanophages may be seen, especially in a perivascular orientation, in chronic inflammatory conditions in which melanin production is greatly
increased.

EDEMA
Dermal edema is recognized by dilated lymphatics (not visible in normal skin), widened
spaces between blood vessels and perivascular collagen (perivascular edema), or widened

FIGURE 2-80. Pigmentary incontinence in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus.

164 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-81. Dermal edema
in a dog with staphylococcal folliculitis. Collagen bundles in left half
of photograph are separated by interstitial edema (compare with
compact collagen bundles in lower
right comer), and dermallyrnphatics are dilated and filled with
frothy edema (arrow).

spaces between large areas of dermal collagen (interstitial edema) (Fig. 2-81). The dilated
lymphatics and widened perivascular and interstitial spaces mayor may not contain a
lightly eosinophilic, homogeneous, frothy-appearing substance (serum). A scattering of
vacuolated macrophages may be seen in the interstitium in chronic severe dermal edema.
Dermal edema is a common, nondiagnostic feature of any inflammatory dermatosis.
Severe edema of the superficial dermis may result in subepidermal vesicles and bullae,
necrosis of the overlying epidermis, and predisposition to artifactual dermoepidermal
separation during the handling and processing of biopsy specimens. Severe edema of the
superficial dermis may result in a vertical orientation and stretching of collagen fibers,
producing the gossamer (webllke) collagen effect seen with erythema multiforme and
severe urticaria.

MUCINOSIS
Mucinosis (myxedema, mucoid degeneration, myxoid degeneration, or mucinous degeneration) is characterized by increased amounts of an amorphous, stringy, granular, basophilic
material that separates, thins, or replaces dermal collagen fibrils and surrounds blood
vessels and appendages in sections stained with H & E (Fig. 2-82). Only small amounts
of mucin are ever visible in normal skin, mostly around appendages and blood vessels.
Mucin is more easily demonstrated with stains for acid mucopolysaccharides, such as
Hale's iron and Alcian blue stains. Mucinosis may be seen as a focal (usually perivascular)
change in numerous inflammatory, neoplastic, and developmental dermatoses. Diffuse
mucinosis may be seen with hypothyroidism, acromegaly, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, various idiopathic mucinoses, and the normal skin of the Chinese Shar pei.
Mucin may also be seen in the epidermis and hair follicle outer root sheath in cats
and dogs with alopecia mucinosa, in feline dermatoses associated with numerous eosinophils (e.g., eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic granuloma, allergies) (Fig. 2-83), and in dogs
with discoid lupus erythematosus.

GRENZ ZONE
This marginal zone of relatively normal collagen separates the epidermis from an underlying dermal alteration (Fig. 2-84). A grenz zone may be seen in neoplastic and granulomatous disorders.

Diagnostic Methods • 165

FIGURE 2-82. Dermal mucinosis (arrow) and scattered mast cells in a Chinese Shar pei
with idiopathic mucinosis.

PAPILLARY MICROABSCESSES
Small neutrophilic microabscesses may occasionally be seen in the dermal papillae of
biopsies from animals with vasculitis, bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and cutaneous adverse drug reaction.

Follicular Changes
Follicular epithelium is affected by most of the histopathologic changes described for the
epidermis. Follicular (poral) keratosis, plugging, and dilatation are common features of
such diverse conditions as inflammatory, hormonal, and developmental dermatoses. Follicular hyperplasia and hypertrophy may be seen in chronic inflammatory dermatoses or in

FIGURE 2-83. Lakes of epidermal mucin (arrow) in a cat with an
eosinophilic plaque.

166 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-84. Grenz zone of superficial dermal collagen (arrow) separating epidermis from underlying neoplasia.

nevoid lesions. Excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame follicles) is seen with endocrine and developmental disorders (Fig. 2-85).39 Trichilemmal keratin is brightly eosinophilic and amorphous, and the tiered "tongues" of excessive keratin give the impression of
a flickering flame. Perifolliculitis, mural folliculitis, luminal folliculitis, and furunculosis
(penetrating or perforating folliculitis) refer to varying degrees of follicular inflammation.
A cell-poor follicular necrosis may be seen in ischemic states and drug reactions. Follicular
atrophy (Fig. 2-86) refers to the gradual involution, retraction, and occasionally miniaturization that are characteristic of hormonal and nutritional dermatoses.
Hair follicles should be examined closely to determine the phase of the growth cycle.
Telogenization, a predominance of telogen hair follicles, is characteristic of hormonal
dermatoses and states of telogen defluxion associated with stress, disease, and drugs.
Catagenization ("catagen arrest") is seen with endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasias, and
so-called post-clipping alopecia. Follicular dysplaSia refers to the presence of incompletely
or abnormally formed hair follicles and hair shafts, and is seen in developmental abnormalities such as follicular dysplasia, color dilution alopecia, and black hair follicle dysplasia.
Dysplastic hair follicles are primary hair follicles, wherein the infundibular region is
dilated and filled with concentrically arranged orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.r" 34. 46 One or
more secondary hair follicles or sebaceous ducts are filled with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and extend into the subjacent dermis, giving the appearance of tentacles or toes (Fig.

Diagnostic Methods • 167

FIGURE 2-85. Flame follicle (excessive trichilemmal keratinization) in a dog with hypothyroidism.

FIGURE 2-86. Follicular atrophy in a dog with hypothyroidism.
Follicles are telogenized and hyperkeratotic, and have receded into
the superficial dermis.

168 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-87. Dysplastic hair follicle in a
dog with cyclic follicular dysplasia. Note how
three secondary hair follicles dangle into the dermis below the dilated, hyperkeratotic infundibulum, resembling tentacles or toes.

2-87). Miniaturized hair follicles may be seen in pattern baldness, paraneoplastic alopecia
of cats, sex hormone dermatoses, nutritional deficiencies, and genetic hypotrichoses.
Perifollicular melanosis (Fig. 2-88) is a common finding in canine demodicosis and
follicular dysplasia." Perifollicular fibrosis (Fig. 2-89) is seen in chronic folliculitis, canine
dermatomyositis, and granulomatous sebaceous adenitis. Dystrophic mineralization of the
basement membrane zone and subsequent transepithelial elimination of mineral is seen in
the calcinosis cutis of hyperadrenocorticism and as a senile change in dogs, especially
Poodles and Bedlington terriers.w 48. 55 The finding of large numbers of cocci or yeasts in
noninflamed hair follicles in dogs (Fig. 2-90) almost always indicates the presence of
clinically relevant bacterial or yeast infection."

Glandular Changes
Sebaceous and epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands may be affected in various dermatoses.
Sebaceous glands may be involved in many suppurative and granulomatous inflammations
(sebaceous adenitis). In dogs and cats, an idiopathic granulomatous sebaceous adenitis may
be characterized by complete absence of sebaceous glands in the late stages. They may
become atrophic (reduced in number and size, with pyknotic nuclei predominating) or
cystic in hormonal (Fig. 2-91A and B) and developmental dermatoses, in occasional
chronic inflammatory processes, and as a senile change. Sebaceous glands may also become hyperplastic in chronic inflammatory dermatoses, sebaceous gland nevi, and senile
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia, Remarkable hyperplasia and dysplasia of sebaceous glands is

Diagnostic Methods • 169

FIGURE 2-88. Perifollicular melanosis in a dog with generalized demodicosis.

FIGURE 2-89. Perifollicular fibrosis in canine
dermatomyositis.

170 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-90. Microcolonies of cocci in hair
follicle of a dog with staphylococcal folliculitis.

seen in dogs with a rare idiopathic greasy skin condition. Sebaceous gland atrophy and
hyperplasia must always be cautiously assessed with regard to the area of the body from
which the skin specimen was taken. Sebaceous gland melanosis may be seen in dogs with
endocrinopathies or follicular dysplasias.
Epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands are commonly involved in suppurative and granulomatous dermatoses (hidradenitis) (Fig. 2-92A). In one study.v' the presence of suppurative hidradenitis in biopsy specimens from dogs was consistently associated with clinical
bacterial folliculitis, furunculosis, or both, even when hair follicles in the specimens were

FIGURE 2-91. Normal versus atrophic canine sebaceous glands. A, Normal canine sebaceous gland. Note the
sebocytes are well-lipidized and their nuclei are normal. B, Atrophic sebaceous gland in a dog with hyperadrenocorticism. Note that the sebocytes are poorly lipidized and their nuclei are pyknotic.

Diagnostic Methods • 171

FIGURE 2-92. A, Suppurative hidradenitis in a dog with staphylococcal furunculosis. B, Epitrichial sweat glands are
dilated and filled with secretion in this dog with atopy and staphylococcal folliculitis. C, Rupture of epitrichial sweat gland
has led to the accumulation of macrophages containing brownish-green granular to globular material (arrow). D, Epitrichial sweat gland necrosis in a cat with herpesvirus infection.

not inflamed. Periapocrine accumulation of plasma cells is commonly seen in acral lick
dermatitis, chronic infections, and lichenoid dermatoses. The epitrichial sweat glands may
become dilated, filled with secretion, or cystic in many inflammatory (see Fig. 2-92B),
developmental, and hormonal dermatoses; in apocrine cystomatosis; and with senile
changes. The light microscopic recognition of epitrichial sweat gland atrophy is moot,
because dilated epitrichial secretory coils containing flattened epithelial cells are a feature
of the normal postsecretory state. Damage to epitrichial sweat glands that allows leakage
of secretion into the surrounding dermis is often accompanied by an accumulation of
macrophages that contain a brown-green granular to globular material (see Fig. 2-92C).
A cell-poor epitrichial sweat gland necrosis may be seen in drug reactions, feline herpesvirus dermatitis (see Fig. 2-92D), and in ischemic states (vasculitis, vasculopathy).

Vascular Changes
Cutaneous blood vessels exhibit a number of histologic changes, including dilatation
(ectasia), endothelial swelling, endothelial necrosis, hyalinization, fibrinoid degeneration,
vasculitis, thromboembolism, and extravasation (diapedesis) of erythrocytes (purpura).

Subcutaneous Fat Changes
The subcutaneous fat (panniculus adiposus or hypodermis) is subject to the connective
tissue and vascular changes described earlier. It is frequently involved in suppurative and
granulomatous dermatoses. In addition, subcutaneous fat may exhibit its own inflammatory
changes (panniculitis or steatitis) without any significant involvement of the overlying

I 72 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-93. Fat necrosis in dogs. A, Fat microcysts separated by amorphous areas of necrosis. E, Variably sized
and shaped fat microcysts in the center of a pyogranuloma.

dermis and epidermis. This occurs in sterile nodular panniculitis, feline nutritional steatitis, infectious panniculitis (especially atypical mycobacteriosis and bacterial and dermatophytic pseudomycetoma), bacterial endocarditis, subcutaneous fat sclerosis, and erythema
nodosum. Subcutaneous fat may atrophy in various hormonal, inflammatory (WIlcher atrophy), and idiopathic dermatoses. Fat micropseudocyst formation and lipocytes containing
radially arranged needle-shaped clefts are seen with subcutaneous fat sclerosis.
Fat necrosis (Fig. 2-93A) may develop whenever an inflammatory reaction involves a
fat lobule. There are three different morphologic expressions of fat necrosis: (1) microcystic fat necrosis (see Fig. 2-93B)-the most common form, characterized by small, round
microcysts that are often at the center of pyogranulomas, seen in many panniculitides; (2)
hyalinizingfat necrosis-the lipocytes are converted into a feathery, eosinophilic amalgam
trapping scattered fat microcysts, as seen in lupus erythematosus panniculitis and rabiesinduced vaccine reactions; and (3) mineralizing fat necrosis-the deposition of irregular,
granular, basophilic material, often in the peripheral cytoplasm of necrotic lipocytes, as
seen in pancreatic panniculitis and some cases of traumatic panniculitis.

Miscellaneous Changes
• Thickened Basement Membrane Zone. Thickening of the basement membrane
zone appears as focal, linear, homogeneous, eosinophilic bands below the stratum basale
on light microscopic examination (Fig. 2-94). The basement membrane zone is better
demonstrated with periodic acid-Schiff stain. Thickening of the basement membrane
zone is a feature of lichenoid dermatoses, especially lupus erythematosus.
• Subepidermal Vacuolar Alteration. Subepidermal vacuolar alteration is charac-

FIGURE 2-94. Focal thickening of the basement membrane zone (arrow) in a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Diagnostic Methods • I 73

FIGURE 2-95. Subepidermal
vacuolar alteration ("bubblies") in a
dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.

terized by multiple small vacuoles within or immediately below the basement membrane
zone, giving the appearance of subepidermal bubbles (Fig. 2-95). These "subepidermal
bubblies" are seen in bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, lupus erythematosus, and occasionally, overlying dermal fibrosis and scar. They may also be induced by
improper fixation and by freezing artifact.
• Papillary Squirting. Papillary squirting is present when superficial dermal papillae
are edematous and contain dilated vessels and when the overlying epidermis is also
edematous and often contains exocytosing leukocytes and parakeratotic scale (see Fig. 236). Squirting papillae are a feature of seborrheic dermatitis and zinc-responsive dermatoses.
• Dysplasia. The term dysplasia refers to a faulty or abnormal development of
individual cells, and it is also commonly used to describe abnormal development of the
epidermis (Fig. 2-96) or hair follicle as a whole. Dysplasia may be a feature of neoplastic,
hyperplastic, and developmental dermatoses. Epidermal dysplasia is characterized by keratinocytes that are atypical in size, shape, and staining characteristics, and whose polarity
has been disrupted.

FIGURE 2-96. Epidermal dysplasia in a cat with actinic keratosis. Note how keratinocytes vary in
staining intensity, size, and shape,
and their polarity is totally disrupted.

174 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-97. Nests of neoplastic melanocytes in a cat with melanocytoma.

• Anaplasia. Anaplasia (atypia) is a feature of neoplastic cells, in which there is a loss
of normal differentiation and organization.
• Metaplasia. Metaplasia refers to a change in the type of mature cells in a tissue
into a form that is not normal for that tissue (e.g., osseous metaplasia in the skin of a
patient with hyperadrenocorticism). Through metaplasia, a given cell may exhibit epithelial, mesothelial, or mesenchymal characteristics, regardless of the tissue of origin.
• Nests. Nests (theques) are well-circumscribed clusters or groups of cells within the
epidermis or the dermis (Fig. 2-97). Nests are seen in some neoplastic and hamartomatous dermatoses, such as melanomas and melanocytomas.
• Lymphoid Nodules. Lymphoid nodules are rounded, discrete masses of primarily
mature lymphocytes (Fig. 2-98). They are often found perivascularly in the deep dermis,
the subcutis, or both. Lymphoid nodules are most commonly recognized in association
with immune-mediated dermatoses, dermatoses with tissue eosinophilia, and panniculitis."
They are also prominent in insect bite granuloma (pseudolymphoma), postinjection panniculitis, and some feline mast cell tumors.
• Multinucleate Epidermal Giant Cells. Multinucleate epidermal giant cells are
found in viral infections and in a number of nonviral and non-neoplastic dermatoses
characterized by epidermal hyperplasia, chronicity, or pruritus. Multinucleated keratinocy-

Diagnostic Methods • 175

FIGURE 2-98. Lymphoid nodule in a cat with idiopathic sterile panniculitis.

tic giant cells ("syncytial" cells) are a unique feature of an FeLV-associated dermatitis in
cats (Fig. 2-99).
• Squamatization. Squamatization refers to the replacement of the normally cuboid
or columnar, slightly basophilic basal epidermal cells by polygonal or flattened, eosinophilic keratinocytes. It may be seen in lichenoid tissue reactions.
• Transepidermal Elimination. Transepidermal elimination is a mechanism by
which foreign or altered constituents can be removed from the dermis (Fig. 2-100). The
process involves unique morphologic alterations of the surface epidermis or the hair
follicle's outer root sheath, which forms a channel and thereby facilitates extrusion. Transepidermal elimination may be seen in foreign-body reactions, calcinosis cutis, calcinosis
circumscripta, and perforating dermatitis of cats.
• Dunstan's Blue Line. The overlying stratum corneum is lifted and subtended at

FIGURE 2-99. Multinucleated
keratinocyte giant cells (arrow) in a
cat with FeLV dermatosis.

176 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-100. Transepidermal elimination of mineral through the outer root
sheath of a hair follicle in a dog with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism.

its point of attachment to the underlying epidermis by degenerate nuclear debris and
staphylococci (Fig. 2-101). As such, the stratum corneum seems to be separating in the
direction of a "blue line." This is most commonly seen in superficial staphylococcal
infections.

Confusing Terms
NECROBIOSIS
Necrobiosis is the degeneration and death of cells or tissue, followed by replacement.
Examples of necrobiosis are the constant degeneration and replacement of epidermal and
hematopoietic cells. The term necrobiosis has been used in dermatohistopathology to
describe various degenerative changes in collagen found in canine and feline eosinophilic
granuloma and in human granuloma annulare, necrobiosis lipoidica, and rheumatoid and
pseudorheumatoid nodules. The use of the term necrobiosis to describe a pathologic
change is inappropriate and confusing, both histologically and etymologically, and should
be discouraged. It is better to use the more specific terms described under Collagen
Changes in this chapter.

Diagnostic Methods • I 77

FIGURE 2-10 I. Dunstan's blue
line. A dark line of degenerate nuclear debris and cocci (arrow) separates the stratum corneum from
the underlying epidermis.

NEVUS AND HAMARTOMA
A nevus is a circumscribed developmental defect in the skin. Nevi may arise from any
skin component or combination of components. Nevi are hyperplastic. The term nevus
should never be used alone but always with a modifier such as epidermal, vascular,
sebaceous, and collagenous.
Hamartoma literally means a tumor-like proliferation of normal or embryonal cells. A
hamartoma is a macroscopic hyperplasia of normal tissue elements, and the term is often
used synonymously with nevus. However, the term hamartoma may be applied to hyperplastic disorders in any tissue or organ system, whereas the term nevus is restricted to the
skin.

Cellular Infiltrates
Dermal cellular infiltrates are described in terms of (1) the types of cells present and (2)
the pattern of cellular infiltration. In general, cellular infiltrates are either monomorphous
(one cell type) or polymorphous (more than one cell type). Further clarification of the
predominant cells is accomplished by modifiers such as lymphocytic, histiocytic, neutrophilic, eosinophilic, and plasmacytic.
Cellular infiltrations usually have one or more of the following basic patterns: (1)
perivascular (angiocentric-Iocated around blood vessels), (2) perifollicular and periglandular (folliculocentric, appendagocentric, periappendageal, periadnexal-Iocated around
follicles and glands), (3) lichenoid (assuming a bandlike configuration that parallels the
overlying epidermis and surrounds epidermal appendages), (4) nodular (occurring in basically well-defined groups or clusters at any site), and (5) interstitial or diffuse (scattered
lightly or solidly throughout the dermis). The types of cells and patterns of infiltration
present are important clues in the diagnosis of many dermatoses.

• DERMATOLOGIC DIAGNOSIS BY HISTOPATHOLOGIC
PATTERNS
With pattern analysis, one first categorizes inflammatory dermatoses by their appearance
(pattern) on the scanning objective of the light microscope and then zeroes in on a
specific diagnosis, whenever possible, by the assimilation of fine details gathered by lowand high-power scrutiny. Pattern analysis has revolutionized veterinary dermatohistopathol-

178 • Diagnostic Methods

ogy and made the reading of skin biopsy specimens much simpler and more rewarding
(for the pathologist, the clinician, and the patient).23, 24. 43. 50, 53-55 However, as with any
histologic method, pattern analysis works only when clinicians supply pathologists with
adequate historical and clinical information and biopsy specimens most representative of
the dermatoses being sampled.
In a retrospective study of skin biopsies from cats with inflammatory dermatoses."
pattern analysis was shown to be a useful technique. The specific clinical diagnosis was
established in about 40% of the cases and was included in a reaction pattern - generated
differential diagnosis in another 50% of the cases. A single reaction pattern was found in
75% of the cases, and mixed reaction patterns (two or three different patterns) in 25% of
the cases. Mixed reaction patterns were usually caused by single etiologic factors or by a
coexistence of two or three different dermatoses.
It is important to remember that many inflammatory dermatoses are characterized by
a continuum of acute, subacute, and chronic pathologic changes. 45. 55 In other words, the
lesions have "lives." For example, three very dissimilar lesions-cellulitis, eosinophilic
plaque, and plasma cell pododermatitis-have somewhat similar developmental stages.
They all begin as perivascular dermatitides, progress to interstitial dermatitides, and eventuate as diffuse dermatitides. Thus, the histopathologic pattern seen in the biopsy specimen from one of these conditions is, in part, dependent on the evolution or "age" of the
lesion.
It is also important to realize that some patterns of inflammation are more important
or more "powerful" than others.v- 55 For example, perivascular dermatitis is present
somewhere in virtually all inflammatory lesions: After all, the inflammatory cells usually
have to exit the blood vessels in order to get to where the cutaneous action is! But, the
question is: are those perivascular cells going somewhere more important, somewhere
more diagnostic? Is there a more important inflammatory reaction pattern being formed?
Hence, one can always find perivascular accumulations of inflammatory cells underlying an
epidermal pustule, or peripheral to a dermal nodule. However, the more important or the
more diagnostic patterns are those of intraepidermal pustular dermatitis and the nodular
dermatitis.

Perivascular Dermatitis
In perivascular dermatitis, the predominant inflammatory reaction is centered on the
superficial or deep dermal blood vessels, or both. Perivascular dermatitis is subdivided into
three types on the basis of accompanying epidermal changes: (1) pure perivascular dermatitis (perivascular dermatitis without significant epidermal changes), (2) spongiotic perivascular dermatitis (perivascular dermatitis with prominent spongiosis), and (3) hyperplastic
perivascular dermatitis (perivascular dermatitis with prominent epidermal hyperplasia).
Superficial perivascular dermatitis is by far the most common form of perivascular
dermatitis (Fig. 2-102A). The usual causes are hypersensitivity reactions (to inhalants,
dietary constituents, drugs, contact allergens, and so forth), ectoparasitisms, dermatophytosis, nutritional deficiencies, seborrheic disorders, and contact dermatitis. Deep perivascular
dermatitis (see Fig. 2-102B) is less common and may be seen with systemic disorders
(systemic lupus erythematosus, septicemia, hypereosinophilic syndrome, viral infections,
and canine systemic histiocytosis) or severe local reactions (vasculitis, discoid lupus erythematosus, cellulitis, eosinophilic plaque, plasma cell pododermatitis, and tick bite reactions).
In the cat, the most common causes of deep perivascular dermatitis are hypersensitivity
disorders (inhalant, food, flea).43
Any perivascular dermatitis containing numerous eosinophils should first be suspected
of representing ectoparasitism or endoparasitism. In the cat, tissue eosinophilia is commonly seen with hypersensitivity disorders (reactions to inhalants or dietary constituentsr."
Focal areas of epidermal edema, eosinophilic exocytosis, and necrosis (epidermal "nibbles") suggest ectoparasitism. Numerous eosinophils are also seen in the hypereosinophilic
syndrome and occasionally in Malassezia dermatitis and zinc-responsive dermatoses.
Diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with perivascular dermatitis suggests endocrinop-

Diagnostic Methods • 179

FIGURE 2- 102. Perivascular dermatitis. A, Superficial perivascular dermatitis in a dog with atopy. B, Deep perivascular dermatitis (arrow) in a cat with atopy.

athy, nutritional deficiencies, developmental abnormalities (ichthyosis, follicular dysplasia,
epidermal nevus, and color dilution alopecia), and secondary seborrheic disorders. Disproportionate follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in concert with perivascular dermatitis
suggests vitamin A- responsive dermatosis, vitamin A deficiency, acne, Schnauzer comedo
syndrome, follicular dysplasia, sebaceous adenitis, comedo nevus, and follicular cyst. Diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis in combination with perivascular dermatitis suggests zincresponsive dermatosis, generic dog food dermatosis, ectoparasitism, Malassezia dermatitis,
lethal acrodermatitis, some vitamin A- responsive dermatoses, thallotoxicosis, necrolytic
migratory erythema, and occasionally, dermatophytosis and dermatophilosis.
Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (parakeratotic caps) may be seen with ectoparasitism, seborrheic disorders, dermatophytosis, and dermatophilosis. When parakeratotic caps
are combined with papillary squirting, seborrheic dermatitis is likely. Perivascular dermatoses accompanied by vertical streaking of collagen, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, or both
suggest chronic pruritus (rubbing, licking, or chewing), such as that seen with hypersensitivity reactions and acral lick dermatitis.

PURE PERIVASCULAR DERMATITIS
The most likely diagnoses include hypersensitivity reactions (to inhalants, dietary constituents, or drugs), urticaria, and dermatophytosis.

SPONGIOTIC PERIVASCULAR DERMATITIS
Spongiotic perivascular dermatitis is characterized by prominent spongiosis and spongiotic
vesicle formation. Severe spongiotic vesiculation may cause blowout of the basement
membrane zone, resulting in subepidermal vesicles. The epidermis frequently shows varying degrees of hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis. The most likely diagnoses include hypersensitivity reactions, contact dermatitis, ectoparasitisms, dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, dermatophilosis, viral infection, and eosinophilic plaque. Diffuse spongiosis, in which
the outer root sheath of the hair follicle is also involved, suggests eosinophilic plaque,

180 • Diagnostic Methods

eosinophilic granuloma, primary seborrhea, Malassezia dermatitis, and zinc-responsive dermatosis. Marked spongiosis and intracellular edema of the upper one half of the epidermis
with overlying diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis seen with necrolytic migratory erythema.

HYPERPLASTIC PERIVASCULAR DERMATITIS
Hyperplastic perivascular dermatitis is characterized by varying degrees of epidermal
hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis, with little or no spongiosis. This is a common, nondiagnostic, chronic dermatitis. It is frequently seen with hypersensitivity reactions, contact dermatitis, diseases of altered keratinization, ectoparasitisms, indolent ulcer, and acral lick dermatitis. Psoriasiform perivascular dermatoses are unusual and may represent chronic
contact dermatitis, chronic hypersensitivity reactions, acral lick dermatitis, psoriasiformlichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, necrolytic migratory erythema, and
dermatophytosis. The most common cause of psoriasiform perivascular dermatitis in dogs
is epitheliotropic lymphoma.

Interface Dermatitis
In interface dermatitis, the dermoepidermal junction is obscured by hydropic degeneration, lichenoid cellular infiltrate, or both (Fig. 2-103).36 Apoptotic keratinocytes, satellite
cell apoptosis and pigmentary incontinence are commonly seen. The hydropic type of
interface dermatitis is seen with cutaneous adverse drug reactions (including fixed drug
reaction), lupus erythematosus, toxic epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme, dermatomyositis, hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers (exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus), idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of collies and Shetland sheepdogs (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus), graft-versus-host reactions, hereditary
nasal hyperkeratosis of Labrador retrievers, and actinic dermatoses. The reactions seen
with toxic epidermal necrolysis, dermatomyositis, thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis
of cats, and various vasculitides and vasculopathies are often only mildly inflammatory
("cell-poor").
The lichenoid type is seen with drug eruptions, lupus erythematosus, pemphigus,
pemphigoid, erythema multiforme, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome, idiopathic lichenoid dermatoses, lichenoid keratoses, actinic keratoses, psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis
of English Springer spaniels, contact reactions to plastic, and epitheliotropic lymphoma.
The bandlike cellular infiltration of lichenoid tissue reactions consists predominantly of
lymphocytes and plasma cells. If nearby ulceration or secondary infections exist, numerous
neutrophils may be present. Canine mucocutaneous pyoderma often has a lichenoid
inflammatory component but lacks hydropic degeneration and apoptosis, and contains
numerous neutrophils and suppurative epidermitis. Uniquely, the lichenoid infiltrate of
uveodermatologic syndrome has numerous large histiocytes, which contain lightly sprinkled
melanin. A lichenoid tissue reaction with many eosinophils suggests an insect or arthropod
bite reaction (e.g., scabies and cheyletiellosis) or a drug eruption. Small numbers of
eosinophils are also a feature of psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer
spaniels. Focal thickening or smudging of the basement membrane zone suggests lupus
erythematosus and dermatomyositis.

Vasculitis
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process in which inflammatory cells are present within and
around blood vessel walls and there are concomitant signs of damage to the blood vessels
(e.g., degeneration and lysis of vascular and perivascular collagen, swelling and necrosis of
endothelial cells, extravasation of erythrocytes, thrombosis, effacement of vascular architecture, and fibrinoid degeneration) (Fig. 2-104). Vasculitides are usually classified on the
basis of the dominant inflammatory cell within vessel walls, the types being neutrophilic,
eosinophilic, and lymphocytic, This appearance, of course, can be greatly modified by
duration of the lesion. Fibrinoid degeneration is rare in canine and feline cutaneous
vasculitides. Biopsy specimens from animals with vasculitis sometimes do not reveal visu-

Diagnostic Methods • 181

FIGURE 2- I 03. Interface dermatitis. A, Hydropic interface dermatitis in a dog with systemic lupus
erythematosus. B, Lichenoid interface dermatitis in a dog with idiopathic lichenoid dermatitis.

ally inflamed vessels but rather some of the signposts of vasculitis (Table 2-9). Serial
sections or repeated biopsy may be necessary to visualize the actual vasculitis.
Neutrophilic vasculitis, the most common type, may be leukocytoclastic (associated
with karyorrhexis of neutrophils, resulting in "nuclear dust"). This pattern is seen in
connective tissue disorders (lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and dermatomyositis), allergic reactions (adverse cutaneous drug reactions, infections, and reactions to
toxins), polyarteritis nodosa, canine staphylococcal hypersensitivity, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and canine leishmaniasis; hereditary nasal pyogranuloma and vasculitis of Scottish terriers; as an idiopathic disorder; and occasionally with plasma cell pododermatitis.
Neutrophilic vasculitis may also be nonleukocytoclastic, as seen with septicemia and
thrombophlebitis from intravenous catheters causing thromboembolism. Exceptions to
these rules may be seen, such as in the case of allergic vasculitides, which may be
leukocytoclastic or nonleukocytoclastic. Vascular thrombosis can occur in dogs receiving
glucocorticoid therapy.
Lymphocytic vasculitis is rare, and may be seen in adverse cutaneous drug reactions,
vaccine-induced panniculitis, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, familial vasculopathy

182 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-104. Vasculitis. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis in a dog with idiopathic cutaneous vasculitis.

of German shepherds, and as an idiopathic disorder. Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is
characterized by vascular damage associated with atypical, pleomorphic lymphoid cells.
Eosinophilic vasculitis is very rare, and is seen with insect- and arthropod-induced
lesions, feline eosinophilic granuloma, food hypersensitivity, and mast cell tumor.
By tradition, leukocytes are not found in the walls of arterioles and large venules,
their presence being prima facie evidence of vasculitis. However, in a recent study.t?
eosinophils were found in the walls of large dermal and subcutaneous venules or veins in
21.4% and 38.9%, respectively, of the cats with eosinophilic granuloma and eosinophilic
plaque (Fig. 2-105). In two cats with eosinophilic plaque, eosinophils were also present in
the walls of deep dermal arterioles. No histologic or clinical evidence of vasculitis was
present in these cats.

Interstitial Dermatitis
Interstitial dermatitis is characterized by the infiltration of cells between collagen bundles
(in the interstitial spaces) of the dermis (Fig. 2-106).45 The infiltrate is poorly circumscribed, is mild to moderate in intensity, and does not obscure the anatomic features of
the skin. In dogs, most interstitial dermatoses are superficial and associated with infections
or infestations, whereas those in the cat are usually superficial and deep and associated

• Table 2-9

HISTOPATHOLOGIC SIGNPOSTS OF
CUTANEOUS VASCULlTIS40

• Large numbers of leukocytes within the vessel wall, especially if the vessel is an arteriole or large venule.
• If the vessel is a postcapillary venule, there are disproportionately more leukocytes within the wall than in the
adjacent dermis.
• Intramural or perivascular hemorrhage, intense edema, and fibrin deposition.
• The presence of leukocytoclasis within the vessel wall.
• Some evidence of damage to the vessel wall beyond edema and endothelial cell prominence.
• Evidence of cutaneous infarction.
• Atrophic changes in hair follicles, adnexal glands, and epidermis, reflecting chronic ischemia.

Diagnostic Methods • 183

FIGURE 2-105. Numerous eosinophils in the wall of a deep dermal arteriole of a cat with an eosinophilic plaque. No vasculitis is present.

FIGURE 2-106. Interstitial dermatitis in
a cat with food hypersensitivity. Note that
the anatomic structures are still readily
identified. There are also focal areas of mural folliculitis.

184 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-107. Interstitial dermatitis in an atopic cat. Interstitial
accumulation of predominantly eosinophils and lymphocytes.

with allergies (Fig. 2-107) and ectoparasites." When the superficial dermis is primarily
involved and the overlying epidermis is normal, urticaria is likely. When the superficial
dermis is primarily involved and the epidermis is hyperplastic, the most likely causes are
staphylococcal infection (numerous neutrophils), dermatophytosis (numerous neutrophils),
yeast dermatitis (numerous lymphocytes), and ectoparasitism, especially scabies and flea
bite hypersensitivity (numerous eosinophils). When the superficial and deep dermis are
involved, likely diagnoses include bacterial or fungal infection (numerous neutrophils,
macrophages, or both), early eosinophilic plaque (numerous eosinophils), and early plasma
cell pododermatitis (numerous plasma cells).

Nodular and Diffuse Dermatitis
Nodular dermatitis denotes discrete clusters of cells. Such dermal nodules are usually
multiple but may occasionally be large and solitary (Fig. 2-108). In contrast, diffuse
dermatitis denotes a cellular infiltrate so dense that discrete cellular aggregates are no
longer easily recognized and the anatomy of the skin is no longer easily visualized (Fig. 2109).
Granulomatous inflammation represents a heterogeneous pattern of tissue reactions in
response to various stimuli. There is no simple, precise, universally accepted way to define
granulomatous inflammation. A commonly proposed definition of granulomatous inflammation is as follows: a circumscribed tissue reaction that is subacute to chronic in nature and
is located about one or more foci, in which the histiocyte or the macrophage is a
predominant cell type. Thus, granulomatous dermatitis may be nodular or diffuse, but not
all nodular and diffuse dermatoses are granulomatous. Nongranulomatous diffuse dermatoses include eosinophilic plaque, plasma cell pododermatitis, and cellulitis. Pseudolymphoma (insect or arachnid bites; drug reactions; idiopathic) is an example of a nongranulomatous nodular dermatitis. Granulomatous infiltrates that contain large numbers of
neutrophils are frequently called pyogranulomatous. The most common causes of nodular
pyogranulomatous dermatitis in dogs are furunculosis and ruptured keratinous cysts.

CELL TYPES
Nodular dermatitis and diffuse dermatitis are often associated with certain unusual inflammatory cell types.
Foam cells are histiocytes with elongated or oval vesicular nuclei and abundant, finely

Diagnostic Methods • 185

FIGURE 2-108. Nodular dermatitis. Dermal nodule with Demodex mites in the center in a
dog with generalized demodicosis.

granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm with ill-defined cell borders. They are called epithelioid
because they appear to cluster and adjoin like epithelial cells (Fig. 2-110).
Multinucleate histiocytic giant cells (Fig. 2-111) are histiocytic variants that assume
three morphologic forms: (1) Langhans-type (nuclei form a circle or semicircle at the
periphery of the cell), (2) foreign body-type (nuclei are scattered throughout the cytoplasm), and (3) Touton-type (nuclei form a wreath that surrounds a central, homogeneous,
amphophilic core of cytoplasm, which is, in tum, surrounded by abundant foamy cyto-

FIGURE 2-109. Diffuse dermatitis. Diffuse granulomatous dermatitis in a dog with sarcoidaI idiopathic granulomas.

186 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-110. Dermal granuloma in a cat. Histiocytes have
a voluminous, stippled cytoplasm
with often ill-defined cell borders.

FIGURE 2-111. Multinucleate histiocytic giant cells are often present in cutaneous granulomas or chronic
inflammations localized around foci of irritation. However, one should understand that identification of anyone
type of giant cell is not diagnostic alone. Several types may be found in a single section, and all are "foreign
body" in character. Their different structure is probably related to the physiochemical nature of the foreign
material. A, Touton-type giant cell. There is a complete ring of nuclei around a ground-glass center, and all are
enclosed within a vacuolated cytoplasm. The photomicrograph is from a human xanthoma. (Courtesy J. D.
Conroy.) B, Langhans-type giant cell. The peripheral rim of nuclei is arranged in a horseshoe fashion.

Diagnostic Methods • 187

FIGURE

2-112. Dermal ab-

scess (neutrophils) in a dog.

plasm). In general, these three forms of giant cells have no diagnostic specificity, although
numerous Touton-type cells are usually seen with xanthomas.

CHARACTERIZATION
Certain general principles apply to the examination of all nodular and diffuse dermatitides.
The processes that should be used are (1) polarizing foreign material, (2) staining for
bacteria and fungi, and (3) culturing. In general, microorganisms are most likely to be
found near areas of suppuration and necrosis.
Nodular and diffuse dermatitis may be characterized by predominantly neutrophilic,
histiocytic, eosinophilic, or mixed cellular infiltrates. Neutrophils (dermal abscess) (Fig. 2112) often predominate in dermatoses associated with bacteria, mycobacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, Prototheca, and foreign bodies. Histiocytes may predominate (Fig. 2-113) in

FIGURE 2-113. Granulomatous
dermatitis in a dog.

188 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-114. Pyogranulomatous dermatitis in a dog.

the chronic stage of any of the entities just listed, in xanthomas, in canine histiocytosis
(cutaneous and systemic), and in the sterile pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome. Eosinophils may predominate in feline and canine eosinophilic granuloma, in certain parasitic
dermatoses (insect and arachnid bite reactions, dirofilariasis, and dracunculiasis), and in
locations where hair follicles have ruptured. Mixed cellular infiltrates are most commonly
neutrophils and histiocytes (in pyogranuloma) (Fig. 2-114), eosinophils and histiocytes (in
eosinophilic granuloma), or a combination.
Plasma cells are common components of nodular and diffuse dermatitis (Fig. 2-115)
of dogs and cats and are of no particular diagnostic significance. They are commonly seen
around glands and follicles in chronic infections. Periapocrine accumulations of plasma
cells are also commonly seen in acral lick dermatitis and lichenoid dermatoses. Hyperactive plasma cells may contain eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions (Russell bodies).

FIGURE 2- 115. Plasma cells
and smaller numbers of neutrophils
and lymphocytes in a dog with
chronic bacterial infection. One
plasma cell contains large intracytoplasmic inclusions (Russell bodies) (arrow).

Diagnostic Methods • 189

FIGURE 2-116. Tuberculoid granuloma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis of Inflammatory Diseases.
Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1978,
p 398.)

These accumulations of glycoprotein are largely globulin and may be large enough to push
the cell nucleus eccentrically.
Granulomas may be subclassified as tuberculoid, sarcoidal, and palisading. Tuberculoid
granulomas have a central zone of neutrophils and necrosis surrounded by histiocytes and
epithelioid cells, which are, in tum, surrounded by giant cells, followed by a layer of
lymphocytes, and finally an outer layer of fibroblasts. These are seen in tuberculosis,
atypical mycobacteriosis, feline leprosy and, rarely, leishmaniasis and protothecosis (Fig.
2-116). Sarcoid granulomas have "naked" epithelioid cells (unaccompanied by surrounding inflammation and fibrosis), as seen in foreign body reactions, idiopathic canine sarcoidal granuloma, and histiocytosis of Bemese mountain dogs (Fig. 2 -117). In palisading
granulomas, the histiocytes are aligned like staves around a central focus of collagen
degeneration (in canine and feline eosinophilic granuloma [Fig. 2-118]); fibrin (in rheumatoid nodule); lipids (in xanthoma); or parasite, fungus, or other foreign material (e.g.,
calcium, as in dystrophic calcinosis cutis and calcinosis circumscripta [Fig. 2-119]). Granulomas and pyogranulomas that track hair follicles and result in large, vertically oriented
(sausage-shaped) lesions are typical of the sterile pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome.
Reactions to ruptured hair follicles are a common cause of nodular and diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermatitis, and any such dermal process should be carefully scrutinized
for keratinous and epithelial debris and should be serially sectioned to rule out this
possibility.
Nongranulomatous nodular and diffuse dermatitis can be a feature of infectious agents
(cellulitis or abscess), feline eosinophilic plaque, feline plasma cell pododermatitis, familial
vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs, pseudolymphomas (Fig. 2-120), and necrotizing
dermatoses (e.g., bums, spider bites, vasculopathies).

Intraepidermal Vesicular and Pustular Dermatitis
Vesicular and pustular dermatitides show considerable microscopic and macroscopic overlap, because vesicles tend to accumulate leukocytes early and rapidly. Thus, vesicular

190 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-117. Sarcoidal granuloma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis of Inflammatory Diseases.
Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1978,
p 408.)

dermatitides in dogs and cats frequently appear pustular or vesicopustular, both macroscopically and microscopically.
Intraepidermal vesicles and pustules (Fig. 2-121) may be produced by intercellular or
intracellular edema (in any acute to subacute dermatitis reaction), ballooning degeneration
(in viral infections), acantholysis (due to the autoantibodies of pemphigus, the proteolytic
enzymes from neutrophils in microbial infections and subcomeal pustular dermatosis, the
proteolytic enzymes from eosinophils in sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and substances
released by some dermatophytes-"), and hydropic degeneration of basal cells (in lupus
erythematosus, erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, dermatomyositis, and
drug eruptions). It is useful to classify intraepidermal vesicular and pustular dermatitides
as to their anatomic level of occurrence within the epidermis (Table 2-10).

Subepidermal Vesicular and Pustular Dermatitis
Subepidermal vesicles and pustules (Fig. 2-122) may be formed through hydropic degeneration of basal cells (in lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme, dermatomyositis, drug
eruption, and toxic epidermal necrolysis), dermoepidermal separation (in bullous pemphigoid, drug eruption, and epidermolysis bullosa), severe subepidermal edema or cellular
infiltration (especially in urticaria, cellulitis, vasculitis, ectoparasitism, and dermal erythema
multiforme), and severe intercellular edema, with blowout of the basement membrane
zone (in spongiotic perivascular dermatitis). Concurrent epidermal and dermal inflammatory changes are important diagnostic clues (see Table 2-10). Caution is warranted when
examining older lesions, because re-epithelialization may cause subepidermal vesicles and
pustules to assume an intraepidermal location. Such re-epithelialization is usually recognized as a single layer of flattened, elongated basal epidermal cells at the base of the
vesicle or pustule.

Diagnostic Methods • 191

FIGURE 2- I 18. Palisading granuloma.
(From Ackerman AB: Histologic Diagnosis
of Inflammatory Diseases. Lea & Febiger,
Philadelphia, 1978, p 416.)

FIGURE 2-119. Foreign-body granuloma. (From Ackerman AB: Histologic
Diagnosis of Inflammatory Diseases. Lea
& Febiger, Philadelphia, 1978, p 436.)

192 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-120. Lymphocytes
and smaller numbers of histiocytes
in a dog with insect bite pseudolyrnphoma.

Perifolliculitis, Folliculitis, and Furunculosis
Perifolliculitis denotes the accumulation of inflammatory cells around a hair follicle,
wherein the follicular epithelium is not invaded (Fig. 2-123).25 Dense perifolliculitis may
be seen in infectious hair follicle disorders, leishmaniasis, and sebaceous adenitis.
Mural folliculitis occurs when the wall of the follicle is targeted, and the lumen is
spared." Four major subdivisions of mural folliculitis are recognized.
1. Inteiface mural folliculitis. As in interface dermatitis, pathologic changes (hydropic

degeneration, keratinocyte apoptosis, lymphocytic exocytosis) tend to target the
outermost (basal) cell layer (Fig. 2-124). Perifollicular inflammation may be cellpoor (hydropic) or cell-rich (lichenoid). Diseases to consider include lupus erythe-

FIGURE 2-121. Intraepidermal pustular dermatitis. Large subcomeal pustule in a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus.

Diagnostic Methods • 193
• Tahle 2-10

HISTOPATHOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION OF
INTRAEPIDERMAL AND SUBEPIDERMAL
PUSTULAR AND VESICULAR DISEASES

ANATOMIC LOCATION

OTHER HELPFUL FINDINGS

Intraepidermal

Subcorneal
Microbial infection
Canine subcomeal pustular dermatosis
Canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Canine linear IgA pustular dermatitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Leishmaniasis
Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of Schnauzer
Intragranular
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus erythematosus

Intraepidermal
Pemphigus vegetans
Benign familial pemphigus
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Viral dermatoses
Spongiotic dermatitis
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Suprabasilar
Pemphigus vulgaris
Intrabasal
Lupus erythematosus
Dermatomyositis
Erythema multiforme
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Graft-versus-host disease
Hereditary lupoid dermatosis (exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
of German shorthaired pointer
Idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
of collie and Shetland sheep dog

Neutrophils, microorganisms (bacteria, fungi), :±: mild acantholysis,
focal necrosis of epidermis, :±: follicular involvement
Neutrophils, :±: moderate acantholysis
Eosinophils, :±: follicular involvement
Marked acantholysis, neutrophils andJor eosinophils, :±: follicular involvement, :±: lichenoid infiltrate
Neutrophils, :±: mild acantholysis
Neutrophils, :±: mild acantholysis, interface dermatitis
Neutrophils, :±: microorganism
Neutrophils, epithelial necrosis

Marked acantholysis, granular "cling-ons," neutrophils andJor eosinophils, :±: follicular involvement
Marked acantholysis, granular "cling-ens," neutrophils andJor eosinophils, :±: lichenoid infiltrate, :±: follicular involvement
Marked acantholysis, eosinophils, papillomatosis
Acantholysis at all levels
Atypical lymphoid cells, Pautrier microabscesses
Ballooning degeneration, :±: inclusion bodies, :±: acantholysis
Eosinophilic spongiosis suggests ectoparasitism, pemphigus, pemphigoid, canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Diffuse parakeratosis, marked edema of upper epidermis
Marked acantholysis, :±: follicular involvement
Interface dermatitis, :±: thickened basement membrane zone,
:±: dermal mucinosis
Interface dermatitis, :±: thickened basement membrane zone,
:±: dermal mucinosis, :±: perifollicular fibrosis
Interface dermatitis, marked single-cell apoptosis of keratinocytes at
all levels of epidermis
Full-thickness coagulation necrosis of epidermis, little or no inflammation
Interface dermatitis
Interface dermatitis
Interface dermatitis

Subepidermal

Bullous pemphigoid

Subepidermal vacuolar alteration, variable inflammation, often eosin-

Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Canine linear IgA bullous dermatosis
Mucous membrane pemphigoid
Epidermolysis bullosa
Lupus erythematosus

Neutrophils
Neutrophils
Noninflammatory
Little or no inflammation, :±: hydropic degeneration
Interface dermatitis, :±: thickened basement membrane zone,
:±: dermal mucinosis, :±: perifollicular fibrosis
Interface dermatitis, marked single-cell necrosis of keratinocytes

ophils

Erythema multiforme
Severe spongiosis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Bums
Severe subepidermal edema/cellular infiltrate

194 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2- 122. Subepidermal vesicular dermatitis. Subepidermal vesicle in a dog with
bullous pemphigoid.

matosus, erythema multiforme, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, demodicosis, thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis in cats, dermatophytosis, graft-versus-host
disease, and various vasculitides and vasculopathies (dermatomyositis, rabies vaccine reaction, etc.).
2. Infiltrative mural folliculitiS. The follicle wall is infiltrated by lymphocytes and
histiocytes in the absence of hydropic degeneration and apoptosis (Fig. 2-125).
The differential diagnosis includes sebaceous adenitis, pseudopelade, feline idiopathic lymphocytic mural folliculitis, cutaneous adverse drug reaction, and early
epitheliotropic lymphoma. Concurrent mucinosis of the outer root sheath is typical
of alopecia mucinosa. In dogs, an idiopathic (possibly drug-related) granulomatous
degenerative folliculopathy is characterized by massive infiltration of lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and multinucleate giant cells.
3. NecrotiZing mural folliculitis. An usually eosinophil-dominated inflammation causes
explosive rupture of follicles, with hemorrhage, and severe dermal mucinosis and
edema (Fig. 2-126). One often sees eosinophilic "molds" of destroyed follicle
walls. The most common causes are arthropod- and insect-related damage (e.g.,
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity, and canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis), A relatively cell-poor or neutrophil-dominated necrotizing mural folliculitis
may be a rare manifestation of cutaneous adverse drug reaction, and may also be
seen in feline herpesvirus dermatitis and ischemic states.
4. Pustular mural folliculitis. Microabscesses and pustules form adjacent to the follicular stratum corneum, producing subcorneal or intragranular follicular pustules
(Fig. 2-127). The most common causes are pemphigus foliaceus or pemphigus
erythematosus (neutrophils or eosinophils with acantholytic keratinocytes) and sterile eosinophilic pustulosis.

Luminal folliculitis implies the accumulation of inflammatory cells within the superficial or deep aspects of the lumen (Fig. 2-128). This is, by far, the most common
histologic type and is usually associated with infectious agents: bacteria, dermatophytes,
and Demodex mites. These folliculitides are dominated by neutrophils. Rare causes include Pelodera nematodes, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, and sterile eosinophilic pinnal
folliculitis. Focal areas of eosinophilic folliculitis may be seen in biopsy specimens from
cats with atopy, food hypersensitivity, or flea bite hypersensitivity."

Diagnostic Methods • 195

FIGURE 2-123. Perifolliculitis. Perifollicular pyogranulomas in a dog with visceral
leishmaniasis.

Furunculosis (penetrating folliculitis) signifies follicular rupture (Fig. 2-129). It most
commonly occurs as a result of luminal folliculitis and less commonly as a result of
necrotizing mural folliculitis. Furunculosis results in pyogranulomatous inflammation of the
surrounding dermis and, occasionally, subcutis. When furunculosis is seen consecutively in
three or more follicles (the "domino" effect), dermatophytosis (especially kerion) is the
most likely diagnosis. Furunculosis is usually associated with moderate numbers of eosinophils, presumably a foreign body-type reaction to free keratin and hair shafts. When
eosinophils are the dominant cell, an antecedent necrotizing (eosinophilic) mural folliculitis is the cause.
Bulbitis indicates a targeting of the inferior segment of the follicle (Fig. 2-130). This
is characteristically seen in alopecia areata. Lymphocytes surround the bulb of anagen hair
follicles like "a swarm of bees." Histiocytes and eosinophils may be present in small
numbers.
Perifollicular fibrosis is seen with chronic folliculitides, dermatomyositis, and chronic
sebaceous adenitis. Perifollicular melanosis can occasionally be seen with numerous folliculitides, but is most characteristic of canine demodicosts.!"
Follicular inflammation is a common microscopic finding, and one must always be
cautious in assessing its importance. It is a common secondary complication in pruritic
dermatoses (e.g., hypersensitivities and ectoparasitism), hormonal dermatoses, and disor-

196 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-124. Interface mural folliculitis in
a dog with generalized demodicosis. Hydropic
degeneration and apoptosis of basal keratinocytes.

ders of keratinization. Hence, a thorough search (histologically and clinically) for underlying causes is mandatory.

Fibrosing Dermatitis
Fibrosis marks the resolving stage of an intense or insidious inflammatory process, and it
occurs mainly as a consequence of collagen destruction. Fibrosis that is histologically
recognizable does not necessarily produce a visible clinical scar. Ulcers that cause damage
to collagen in the superficial dermis only do not usually result in scarring, whereas
virtually all ulcers that extend into the deep dermis inexorably proceed to fibrosis and
clinical scars.
Fibrosing dermatitis (Fig. 2-131) follows severe insults of many types to the dermis.
Thus, fibrosing dermatitis alone is of minimal diagnostic value other than for its testimony
to antecedent injury. The pathologist must look carefully for signs of the antecedent
process, such as furunculosis, vascular disease, foreign material, lymphedema, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, acral lick dermatitis, and morphea. In cats, an uncommon
chronic ulcerative dermatitis is characterized by linear subepidermal fibrosis, which extends peripheral to the ulcer.

Panniculitis
The panniculus is commonly involved as an extension of dermal inflammatory processes,
especially of suppurative and granulomatous dermatoses. Likewise, there is usually some
deep dermal involvement in virtually all panniculitides.
Panniculitis is conveniently divided on an anatomic basis into the lobular type (pri-

Diagnostic Methods • 197

FIGURE 2- 125. Infiltrative mural folliculitis
in a dog with a cephalexin cutaneous adverse
drug reaction. Lymphocytes infiltrate follicular
outer root sheath in the absence of hydropic degeneration and apoptosis of basal keratinocytes.

marily involving fat lobules), the septal type (primarily involving interlobular connective
tissue septa), and the diffuse type (both anatomic areas involved) (Fig. 2-132). Patterns of
panniculitis appear to have little diagnostic or prognostic significance in dogs and cats, and
all three patterns may be seen in a single lesion from the same patient.P? Neither does the
cytologic appearance (pyogranulomatous, granulomatous, suppurative, eosinophilic, lymphoplasmacytic, or fibrosing) appear to have much diagnostic or prognostic signiflcance."
Most panniculitides, regardless of the cause, look histologically similar.
In dogs, diffuse panniculitis is the most common pattern, and septal panniculitis is
most often found in cats. As with nodular and diffuse dermatitis, polarization, the use of
special stains, and cultures are usually indicated. Septal panniculitis is seen with vasculitides and erythema nodosum. A rare form of canine panniculitis, one associated with lupus
erythematosus (lupus profundus or lupus erythematosus panniculitis), is characterized by
lymphoplasmacytic septal to lobular panniculitis, with septal vasculitis, numerous lymphoid
nodules, mucinosis, and often an overlying interface dermatitis. Similar microscopic lesions
occur at the sites of previous vaccinations (especially rabies) or drug injections. Feline
subcutaneous fat sclerosis is characterized by marked septal fibrosis, fat micropseudocyst
formation, and lipocytes that contain radially arranged, needle-shaped clefts.

Atrophic Dermatosis
Atrophic dermatosis is characterized by varying degrees of epithelial and connective
tissue atrophy (Fig. 2-133). Disorders in this category are endocrine, nutritional, and
developmental dermatoses; telogen defluxion; and postclipping follicular arrest. Endocrine
dermatoses are the most common and show variable combinations of the following histopathologic changes: diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, follicular
keratosis, follicular atrophy, telogenization or catagenization of hair follicles, excessive

198 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2- 126. Necrotizing mural folliculitis
in a cat with mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Neerotic follicular epithelium and eosinophils surround an empty pilar canal.

trichilemmal keratinization (flame follicles), epithelial melanosis, and sebaceous gland atrophy.24. 35. :39. 54. 55 Inflammatory changes are frequent and potentially misleading in the
atrophic dermatoses and reflect the common occurrence of secondary bacterial infection,
seborrhea, or both with these disorders. Findings suggestive of specific endocrinopathies
include diffuse mucinosis (hypothyroidism), dystrophic mineralization (hyperadrenocorticism), hypertrophied or vacuolated arrector pili muscles (hypothyroidism), decreased
dermal elastin (hyposomatotropism and hyperadrenocorticism), dermal atrophy (hyperadrenocorticism and hyposomatotropism), and absence of arrector pili muscles (hyperadrenocorticism). Adrenal sex hormone abnormalities seem to produce a unique combination of atrophic dermatosis and follicular dysplasia.
Findings suggestive of nutritional disorders include misshapen, corkscrew hairs and
small hairs. Developmental disorders such as follicular dysplasias, and color dilution alopecia are characterized by variable degrees of follicular dysplasia and anomalous deposition
of melanin. The various follicular dysplasias produce dysplastic hair shafts, but endocrinopathies do not. 20. 34 Dysplastic hair shafts may also be seen in alopecia areata, anagen
defluxion, and thallotoxicosis. These should not be confused with the twisted, malacic hair
shafts seen in biopsy specimens from cats with allergies and psychogenic alopecia (the
"twang sign" of the hair pulling cat), nor the eosinophilic, amorphous, "infarcted hairs"
seen with vasculopathies. Miniaturization of hair follicles and hair shafts may be seen in
nutritional disorders, genetic hypotrichoses, pattern baldness, paraneoplastic alopecia, and
sex hormone dermatoses. Telogen defluxion is characterized by diffuse telogenization of
hair follicles, with no other signs of cutaneous atrophy. Postclipping follicular arrest is
characterized by diffuse catagenization or telogenization of hair follicles, with no other
signs of cutaneous atrophy. In the chronic stage, alopecia areata may be characterized by

Diagnostic Methods • , 99

FIGURE 2-127. Pustular mural folliculitis in
a dog with pemphigus foliaceus. Intramural microabscess at base of follicle is filled with neutrophils and acantholytic keratinocytes. Pilar canal is
not involved.

follicular atrophy, dysplastic hair shafts, or "orphaned" cutaneous glands and arrector pili
muscles. In the chronic stage, granulomatous sebaceous adenitis may have complete
absence of sebaceous glands, a feature that is not seen with endocrine, nutritional, and
most developmental dermatoses. The acquired skin fragility syndrome of cats is characterized by striking atrophy, attenuation, and disorganization of dermal collagen.

Mixed Reaction Patterns
Because skin diseases have a pathologic continuum, reflecting various combinations of
acute, subacute, and chronic changes, and because animals can have more than one
dermatosis at the same time, it is common for one or two biopsy specimens from the
same animal to show two or more reaction patterns (Fig. 2-134). For instance, it is
common to see an overall pattern of perivascular dermatitis (due to hypersensitivity
reactions or ectoparasitism) or atrophic dermatosis (due to endocrinopathy) with a subordinate, focal pattern of folliculitis, furunculosis, or intraepidermal pustular dermatitis (due
to secondary bacterial infection). Likewise, one can find multiple patterns from one or two
biopsy specimens from an animal with a single disease (e.g., vasculitis, diffuse necrotizing
dermatitis, and fibrosing dermatitis in a patient with necrotizing vasculitis). Mixed reaction
patterns (two or three patterns) were found in about 25% of the biopsy specimens from
cats with inflammatory dermatoses.v

Invisible Dermatoses
Generations of dermatohistopathologists have struggled with biopsy specimens from diseased skin that appear normal under the microscope. Because normal skin is rarely
included in biopsy specimens in clinical practice, one must assume that some evidence of

200 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-128. Luminal folliculitis in a dog
with sterile eosinophilic pustulosis.

FIGURE 2-129. Furunculosis. Follicular rupture in a dog with staphylococcal furunculosis.

Diagnostic Methods • 20 I

FIGURE 2-130. Bulbitis in a dog with alopecia areata.

disease is present. From the perspective of the dermatohistopathologist, the invisible
dermatoses are clinically evident skin diseases that show a histologic picture resembling
normal skin.!? Technical problems must be eliminated, such as sampling errors that occur
when normal skin on an edge of the biopsy specimen has been sectioned and the diseased
tissue has been left in paraffin.
When confronted with an invisible dermatosis, the dermatohistopathologist should
consider the following possible disorders and techniques for detecting them: dermatophytosis (special stain for fungi in keratin); ichthyosis (removal of surface keratin); psychogenic alopecia; pigmentary disturbances such as hypermelanoses and hypomelanoses, including lentigo and vitiligo; amorphous deposits in the superficial dermis (Congo red stain
for amyloid deposits); urticaria; urticaria pigmentosa (toluidine blue stain for mast cells);
connective tissue disorder (cutaneous asthenia); and various nevi.

Conclusion
A skin biopsy can be diagnostic, confirmatory, and helpful, or it can be inconclusive,
depending on the dermatosis; the selection, handling, and processing of the specimen; and
the skill of the histopathologist.
The dermatopathologist has no right to make a diagnosis of nonspecific dermatitis or
inflammation. Every biopsy specimen is a sample of some specific process, but the visible
changes may be noncharacteristic and may not permit a diagnosis.
The clinician should never accept the terms "nonspecific changes" and "nonspecific
dermatitis." Many pathologic entities that are now well recognized were once regarded as
nonspecific. Recourse to serial sections (the key pathologic changes may be focal), special
stains, second opinions, and further biopsies may be necessary.

202 • Diagnostic Methods

FIGURE 2-131. Fibrosing dermatitis. Dermal fibrosis after follicular rupture in a dog
with staphylococcal furunculosis, Note orphaned sebaceous gland and pigmentary incontinence (arrow).

A recent study in human dermatopathology assessed the utility of deeper sections and
special stains.P' Deeper sections provided diagnostic information in 37% of the cases in
which they were ordered. Special stains contributed to the diagnosis in 21% of the cases
for which they were ordered.

• SPECIAL PROCEDURES
In the past decade, a number of techniques have been developed for studying biopsy
specimens. These techniques were usually advanced to allow the identification of special
cell types. Examples of such procedures include immunofluorescence testing, electron
microscopy, enzyme histochemistry, and immunocytochemistry.
Immunofluorescence testing is not routinely done in veterinary medicine (see Chap.
9). Biopsy specimens for immunofluorescence testing must be carefully selected and
either snap frozen or placed in Michel's fixative. Electron microscopy is best performed
on small specimens (1 to 2 mm in diameter) fixed in 3% glutaraldehyde. Enzyme histochemistry is performed on frozen sections or on tissues fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde,
dehydrated in acetone, and embedded in glycol methacrylate (Table 2-11). Immunocytochemistry may be performed on formalin-fixed, routinely processed tissues (e.g., immuno-

Diagnostic Methods • 203

FIGURE 2-132. Panniculitis. A, Lobular panniculitis in a cat
with idiopathic sterile panniculitis. B, Septal panniculitis in a cat
with idiopathic sterile panniculitis.

FIGURE 2-133. Atrophic dermatosis in a dog with hyposomatotropism.

204 • Diagnostic Methods
• Table 2-11

EXAMPLES OF MARKERS FOR THE
IDENTIFICATION OF CELL TYPES

MARKER

CELL TYPE

Enzyme Histochemical
a- Naphthyl acetate esterase
Chloroacetate esterase
Acid phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase
j3-Glucuronidase
Adenosine triphosphatase
5' -Nucleotidase
Nonspecific esterase
Lysozyme
a)-Antitrypsin
Chymase
Tryptase
Oipeptidyl peptidase II

Monocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cell, plasma cell
Neutrophil, mast cell
Monocyte, histiocyte, plasma cell
Neutrophil, endothelial cell
Histiocyte, T lymphocyte, plasma cell
Histiocyte, plasma cell, B lymphocyte, endothelial cell
Endothelial cell
Monocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cell
Monocyte, histiocyte
Monocyte, histiocyte, mast cell
Mast cell
Mast cell
Mast cell

Immunohistochemical

Cytokeratin
Vimentin

Oesmin
Neurofilament
S100 protein
Myoglobin
Factor VIII - related antigen
Peanut agglutinin
Myelin basic protein
Neuron-specific enolase
Collagen IV
Laminin
COla
COlb
COlc
C03
C04
CDS
COlla
CD lIb
COlIc
COIS
C021
C031
C044
C045
C049
C054
C079

Squamous and glandular epithelium, Merkel's cell
Fibroblast, Schwarm cell, endothelial cell, myoepithelial cell, lipocyte,
smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, mast cell, plasma cell, melanocyte,
lymphocyte, monocyte, histiocyte, Langerhans' cell
Skeletal muscle, smooth muscle
Axon cell bodies, dendrites
Melanocyte, Schwarm cell, myoepithelial cell, sweat gland acini and ducts,
lipocyte, macrophage
Skeletal muscle
Endothelial cell
Histiocyte
Schwarm cell
Schwann cell, Merkel's cell
Basement membrane
Basement membrane
Langerhans' cell, dendritic cells
Dendritic cells
Dendritic cells
T lymphocytes
Helper T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, neutrophils
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
All leukocytes
Monocytes, granulocytes
Monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes, dendritic cells
All leukocytes
B lymphocytes
Endothelial cell
Lymphocytes, monocytes, granulocytes
All leukocytes
T lymphocytes, monocytes, granulocytes
ICAM-I
B lymphocytes

peroxidase methods) or on frozen sections (e.g., lymphocyte markers), depending on the
substance being studied (see Table 2-11).
Molecular biological techniques (in situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction) are
having an impact on many different aspects of medicine." In the realm of infectious
agents, these nucleic acid probes are enhancing diagnostic capabilities, avoiding the need
of culturing infectious agents for the purpose of diagnosis, allowing earlier detection of
infection, and permitting the detection of latent infections.

Diagnostic Methods • 205

FIGURE 2-134. Mixed reaction
in a dog with atopy and secondary
staphylococcal dermatitis. Hyperplastic, superficial, lymphocytic
perivascular dermatitis on the left
(atopy) and intraepidermal neutrophilic pustular dermatitis on the
right (staphylococcal infection).

• REFERENCES
General
1. Alhaidari Z: Les lesions elementaires dermatologiques.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 23:101, 1988.
2. Griffin CEG: Unpublished observations.
3. Scott DW: Examination of the integumentary system.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 11:499, 1981.
4. Shearer D: Laboratory diagnosis of skin disease. In
Pract 13:149, 1991.
4a. Bevier DE: The reaction of feline skin to the intradermal injection of allergenic extracts and passive cutaneous anaphylaxis using serum from skin test positive
cats. In: Von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 1. Bailliere
Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 126.

Age
5. Bourdeau P: Dermatologie du jeune carnivore. Point
Vet 21:439, 1989.
6. Bourdeau P: Elements de dermatologie du chien et du
chat vieillessants. Point Vet 22:255, 1990.
7. Foil CS: The skin. In: Hoskins JD (ed): Veterinary
Pediatrics. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p
359.
8. Halliwell REW: Skin diseases of old dogs and cats. Vet
Rec 126:389, 1990.
8a. Jaworsky C: The molecular diagnosis of infection. J
Cutan Pathol 20:508, 1993.

Breed
9. Ihrke PJ, Franti CE: Breed as a risk factor associated
with skin diseases in dogs seen in northern California.
Calif Vet 39:13, 1985.
10. Scott DW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline
skin disorders seen in a university practice: Small Animal Clinic, University of Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe,
Quebec (1987-1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.

Cytologic Examination
11. Perman V, et al: Cytology of the Dog and Cat. American Animal Hospital Association, South Bend, IN,
1979.

12. Columbo S: Quantitative evaluation of cutaneous bacteria in normal dogs and dogs with pyoderma by cytological evaluation. Doctoral Thesis, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Milan, Italy, 1997.

Biopsy and Dermatopatho/ogic Examination; The Vocabulary of Dermatohistopatho/ogy
13. Andreoletti 0, et al: Identification de l'apoptose cutanee chez Ie chien et Ie chat par methode TUNEL:
Etude preliminaire sur coupes histologiques apres inclusion en paraffine. Rev Med Vet 148:781, 1997.
14. Bagladi MS, et al: Sebaceous gland melanosis in dogs
with endocrine skin disease or follicular dysplasia: A
retrospective study. Vet Dermatol 7:85, 1996.
15. Beningo KE, et al: Subepidermal linear alignment of
mast cells in inflammatory dermatoses of the dog. Vet
Dermatol11:13, 2000.
16. Boiron G, et al: Phagocytosis of erythrocytes by human
and animal epidermis. Dermatologica 165:158, 1982.
16a. Brignac MM, et al: Microscopy of color mutant alopecia. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 4:14, 1988.
16b. Brown WM, Stenn KS: Homeobox genes and the
patterning of skin diseases. J Cutan Pathol 20:289,
1993.
17. Brownstein MH, Rabinowitz AD: The invisible dermatoses. J Am Acad Dermatol 8:579, 1983.
18. Cayatte SM, et al: Perifollicular melanosis in the dog.
Vet Dermatol 3:165, 1992.
ISa. Doubleday DW: Who is Nikolsky and what does his
sign mean. J Am Acad Dermatol 16:1054, 1987.
19. Dunstan RW: A user's guide to veterinary surgical pathology laboratories or, why do I still get a diagnosis of
chronic dermatitis even when I take a perfect biopsy?
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1397, 1990.
20. Dunstan RW: A pathomechanistic approach to diseases
of the hair follicle. Br Vet Dennatol Study Grp 17:37,
1995.
21. Fairley RA: Collagenolysis: "It ain't easy being pink."
Vet Pathol 28:96, 1991.

206 • Diagnostic Methods
22. Fernandez CJ, et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
collagen in eosinophil or neutrophil rich inflammatory
dermatoses of horses and cats as demonstrated with
Masson's trichome stain. Vet Dermatolll:43, 2000.
23. Goldschmidt MH: Small animal dermatopathology:
'What's old, what's new, what's borrowed, what's useful: Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 2:162, 1987.
24. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. A Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and
Feline Skin Disease. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1992.
25. Gross TL, et al: An anatomical classification of folliculitis. Vet Dermatol 8:147, 1997.
26. Henfrey JI, et al: A comparison of three local anaesthetic techniques for skin biopsy in dogs. Vet Dermatol
2:21, 1991.
26a. Jang SS, Biberstein EL: Laboratory diagnosis of fungal and algal infections. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p 639.
26b. Kennis RA: Quantitation and topographical analysis of
Malassezia organisms in normal canine skin. Proc Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:23, 1993.
27. Leider M, Rosenblum M: A Dictionary of Dermatological Words, Terms, and Phrases. McGraw-Hili Book
Co, New York, 1968.
28. Maingi CP, Helm KF: Utility of deeper sections and
special stains for dermatopathology specimens. J Cutan
Pathol 25:171, 1998.
29. Majno G, Joris I: Apoptosis, oncosis, and necrosis. An
oveIView of cell death. Am J Pathol 146:3, 1995.
30. Mauldin EA, et al: Malassezia dermatitis in the dog: A
retrospective histopathological and immunopathological
study of 86 cases (1990-1995). Vet Dermatol 8:191,
1997.
31. Mehregan AH: Clear epidermal cells: An artifact. J
Cutan Pathol 7:154, 1980.
32. Parker WM, Yager JA: Trichophyton dermatophytosis-a disease easily confused with pemphigus erythematosus. Can Vet J 38:502, 1997.
32a. Plant JD, et al: Factors associated with and prevalence of high Malassezia pachqdermatis numbers on
dog skin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:879, 1992.
33. Raskin CA: Apoptosis and cutaneous biology. J Am
Acad Dermatol 36:885, 1997.
34. Rothstein E, et al: A retrospective study of dysplastic
hair follicles and abnormal melanization in dogs with
follicular dysplasia syndromes or endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
35. Scott DW: Histopathologic findings in the endocrine
skin disorders of the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:
173, 1982.
36. Scott DW: Lichenoid reaction in the skin of dogs:
Clinicopathologic correlations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
20:305, 1984.
37. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Panniculitis in dogs and cats:
A retrospective analysis of 78 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 24:551, 1988.

38. Scott DW: Lymphoid nodules in skin biopsies from
dogs, cats, and horses with non-neoplastic dermatoses.
Cornell Vet 79:267, 1989.
39. Scott DW: Excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame
follicles) in endocrine skin disorders of the dog. Vet
Dermatol 1:37, 1990.
40. Scott DW: Epidermal mast cells in the cat. Vet Dermatol 1:65, 1990.
41. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
within non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from
dogs with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82:
371, 1992.
42. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
within non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from
cats with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82:
379, 1992.
43. Scott DW: Analyse du type de reaction histopathologique dans Ie diagnostic des dermatoses inflammatoires
chez Ie chat: Etude portant sur 394 cas. Point Vet 26:
57,1994.
44. Scott DW: Suppurative inflammation of apocrine sweat
glands (suppurative hidradenitis) in the dog: A retrospective clinicopathological analysis of 100 cases. Vet
Dermatol 6:75, 1995.
45. Scott DW: La dermatite interstitielle chez Ie chien et
Ie chat: Etude retrospective sur la signification de cette
modalite de reaction histopathologique. Med Vet Quebec 26:16, 1996.
46. Scott DW: Les agregats de melanine dans I'appareil
pilo-sebace: Signification en dermatohistopathologie du
chat. Med vet Quebec 28:38, 1998.
47. Scott DW: Eosinophils in the walls of large dermal
and subcutaneous blood vessels in biopsy specimens
from cats with eosinophilic granuloma or eosinophilic
plaque. Vet Dermatol 10:77, 1999.
48. Seaman WJ, Chang SH: Dermal perifollicular mineralization of toy poodle bitches. Vet Pathol 21:122, 1984.
49. Steffen C: Dyskeratosis and the dyskeratoses. Am J
Dermatopathol 10:356, 1988.
50. Teifke JP, et al: Aussagekraft und Moglichkeiten der
histopahologischen Diagnostik bei rassespezifischen
Hauterkrankungen. Tierarztl Prax 26:247, 1998.
51. Williams BJ, et al: Antimicrobial effects of lidocaine,
bicarbonate, and epinephrine. J Am Acad Dermatol 37:
662, 1997.
52. Wood C, et al: Eosinophilic infiltration with flame figures. Am J DermatopathoI8:186, 1988.
53. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Skin biopsy: Revelations and
limitations. Can Vet J 29:969, 1988.
54. Yager JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
Jubb KVP, et al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals
IV, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p 531.
55. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical
Pathology of the Dog and Cat. Dermatopathology and
Skin Tumors. Wolfe Publishing, London, 1994.

Chapter

3
Dermatologic Therapy

• CARE OF NORMAL SKIN AND HAIRCOAT
The veterinarian is vitally concerned with the health of the patient's skin and is often
consulted by clients regarding preventive care as well as optimal maintenance of the
normal skin and haircoat. Most commonly, questions about the healthy pet's skin and hair
relate to nutrition, skin and coat supplements, ectoparasite control (see Chap. 6), bathing,
and shedding. Additionally, the veterinarian may be queried about optimal grooming.
Many veterinary practices offer medicated baths and dips as well as routine bathing.
Although the skin reflects the animal's general health, many vigorous, healthy, normal
pets have unkempt haircoats-mainly because of neglect or the client's lack of knowledge
regarding proper grooming. Keeping the haircoat free from mats and removing the
shedded undercoat allows more appropriate thermoregulation and discourages irritation
and secondary bacterial infection. Therefore, it is valuable for the veterinarian to be
familiar with routine grooming equipment as well as general skin and hair care.
Because most veterinarians are not groomers, questions regarding grooming and
especially haircut styles are usually handled more appropriately by a qualified groomer.
Styles change, and variations in clipping can enhance or mask aspects of conformation that
affect the animal's appearance. These nuances of style are the province of owners, breeders, handlers, and commercial grooming establishments. However, most clients expect
veterinarians to know about basic grooming and bathing. Much of the following discussion is presented as background for students or information that can be transmitted to
clients.s- 148, 172

Basic Nutrition and the Skin
Nutritional factors that influence the skin are exceedingly complex (see Chap. 17). The
skin and haircoat utilize a major part of the nutritional requirements of dogs and cats.
Modifications of nutrition, therefore, may have visible effects on the skin and haircoat.
Nutritional modifications are utilized in two ways in relation to skin and haircoat. The
first is the basic diet and additional supplements given to normal or diseased animals that
are deSigned to produce a high-quality haircoat. The second is nutritional therapy or
treatment wherein diets and supplements are given for a specific disease or problem. In
many situations, these treatments entail high doses that most likely have metabolic or
pharmacologic effects other than just meeting nutritional requirements. In most cases
(other than those discussed in Chap. 17), the success of these treatments is probably not
related to nutritional deficiency. The most common ingredients of the diet that seem to
benefit the quality of the skin and haircoat are the protein level and fatty acids, with some
effect coming from the vitamins and minerals.
The skin and hair are the organs that utilize the most protein from the diet. When
there is a deficiency of protein, the haircoat is one of the first organs affected (see Chap.
17). However, protein deficiency is rare in domestic pets, particularly if a commercial food
is used. Some breeders recommend supplementing diets with extra protein sources, but
the need for this has not been well documented.
Fats are an important part of the diet and are valuable as a concentrated energy

207

208 • Dennatologic Therapy
source. If there is too little total fat (less than 5% of dry matter) or linoleic acid (less than
1% dry matter) a dry scaly skin or poor haircoat results.' Fatty acids have been recommended for many years as dietary supplements to improve the sheen and luster of the
haiL l , 5 1 Fatty acids as therapeutic agents are discussed in Chapters 8 and 14. It is now
impossible for the small animal clinician to practice without some knowledge of fatty
acids.
Fatty acids are long carbon chains with a methyl group at one end. Polyunsaturated
fatty acids have multiple double bonds. The numeric formulas used to identify fatty acids
give the number of carbon atoms, followed by the number of double bonds, then the
location of the first double bond from the methyl group. Therefore, the formula for
linoleic acid (18:2N-6) means there are 18 carbons and 2 double bonds, with the first
occurring at the sixth carbon atom from the methyl end of the molecule.
The fatty acids that have the first double bond three carbon molecules away from the
methyl group are the omega-3 (N-3) series. The omega-6 (N-6) series of polyunsaturated
fatty acids have the first double bond six carbons from the methyl group. These two
complete series of fatty acids cannot be synthesized by dogs and cats, and therefore the
18-carbon molecule (linoleic and linolenic acid) must be supplied in the diet. They are
called essential fatty acids for this reason. The essential fatty acids most important in
cutaneous homeostasis are linoleic acid (18:2N-6) and linolenic acid (18:3N-3) in the dog.
In the cat, arachidonic acid (20:4N-6) is also an essential fatty acid. Dihomo-gammalinolenic acid (DGLA) (20:3N-6) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) (20:5N-3) can be
synthesized in the animal from linoleic acid and linolenic acid, respectively.
The synthesis of fatty acids involves the action of various desaturase enzymes, which
insert double bonds into the chain. Other enzymes called elongases add additional carbon
molecules to the existing chain. The presence of these specific enzymes varies in different
groups or species of animals and may differ among individuals with certain diseases.
The best example of this is A-6-desaturase deficiency in atopic humans. Also, the skin
is deficient in desaturase enzymes. Therefore, when linoleic acid, y-linolenic acid (18:3N6), or DGLA accumulates locally, it cannot be metabolized to arachidonic acid locally.
DGLA competes with arachidonic acid for cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase enzymes. This
competitive inhibition, in addition to the effects of their metabolic byproducts, is thought
to be the mechanism for anti-inflammatory action of fatty acid therapy, which generally
involves modification of leukotriene and prostaglandin synthesis and activity. Fatty acids
are also important for other reasons, however.
Fatty acids are valuable components of cell membranes but also have an extracellular
function in the skin. They are responsible for the luster of the normal haircoat and the
smoothness of the skin. Linoleic acid is particularly important because only it supplies the
proper conditions for the water permeability functions of the intercellular lipid bilayer of
the skin (see Chap. 1).
Metabolic byproducts are important in promoting or inhibiting inflammation. This is
especially true of arachidonic acid metabolites. Arachidonic acid is stored in cells in an
unavailable form until it is released by the action of phospholipase A2 . Arachidonic acid
metabolites have been identified in many cell types that participate in hypersensitivity
reactions (mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, keratinocytes, and vascular endothelial cells).
The effects of prostaglandins on the skin include alteration of vascular permeability,
potentiation of vasoactive substances such as histamine, modulation of lymphocyte function, and potentiation of pain and itch. Prostaglandins and leukotrienes potentiate each
other. The effects of leukotrienes on the skin are to alter vascular permeability, activate
neutrophils, modify lymphocyte function, and cause potent neutrophil and eosinophil
chemotaxis.P? Manipulation of fatty acid metabolism by using the shared enzyme system to
competitively inhibit formation of some of these substances seems possible.
It was shown that dogs with seborrhea sicca have abnormally low cutaneous levels of
linoleic acid.27 Additionally, these dogs have increased levels of cutaneous oleic acid. Oleic
acid is thought to be substituted in phospholipid membranes when there is a relative
deficiency of linoleic acid. However, serum linoleic levels in the seborrheic dogs were

Dennatologic Therapy • 209
normal and the dogs were not receiving a diet deficient in essential fatty acids. Despite
normal serum levels, treatment with oral sunflower oil reversed the cutaneous abnormalities. Sunflower oil, which is 78% linoleic acid, was added to the diet at 1.5 mVkglday.27
Saffiower oil is also a good source of linoleic acid and has been recommended at 0.5 mll
kglday.211
Another interesting study showed that seborrheic dogs have abnormal transepidermal
water loss, and this may be corrected by topical application of linoleic acid. 26 The suggestion that topical application may be more effective than oral administration was raised.
Studies to determine the most efficacious, cost-effective, and client-acceptable way to treat
dogs with dry skin deficient in linoleic acid are awaited. The dose used in the study of
topical application would have made dogs too greasy for most clients.
Now that the value of linoleic acid in the diet is well established for seborrheic dogs,
it is important that clinicians counsel clients accordingly. Besides the possibility of adding
linoleic acid sources to the diet, the proper handling of dog food should also be considered. Overcooking foods may decrease the levels of linoleic acid. Allowing rancidity to
occur by improper or prolonged storage or inadequate levels of antioxidants is another
consideration.
In general, dry foods should be kept at room temperature, out of direct light, and in
non-lipid-permeable or nonabsorbing containers. Dry foods should not be stored open
for longer than 1 month. To ensure adequate levels of linoleic acid, supplementation with
5 ml (1 tsp) of sunflower or saffiower oil per 240 ml (8 oz) dry dog food should be
sufficient. This may not be effective in cases of maldigestion, malabsorption, or abnormal
fatty acid metabolism. Interestingly, it has also been shown that age and breed differences
in fatty acid metabolism may also effect the response to any diet. 192
Some of the premium dog food companies have recognized the value of these fatty
acids and now incorporate them in the diets. Besides their effect on the management of
pruritus in allergic dogs, fatty acids have been shown to be beneficial for the luster of the
haircoat. The optimal ratio of N6 to N3 fatty acids to minimize production of the
inflammatory mediator LTB4 has been found to be between 5:1 and 10:1,198 This level
also appears to improve coat quality and yields a much higher total intake of N-3 fatty
acids than is usually achieved by supplements.
Fatty acid supplementation is generally thought to be relatively benign. Caution is
warranted, however. Aggravation of pancreatitis has been descnbed/" and cutaneous
xanthomas developed in cats fed excessive fat. 201 Obesity is another problem encountered
with higher fat diets and fatty acid supplementation. Diarrhea is infrequent. There had
been some concern about platelet abnormalities and bleeding disorders with diets high in
omega-3 fatty acids, but this has not been supported by current research."
Many owners inquire about vitamin and mineral supplements. It appears that most
commercial foods have adequate levels. Vitamins A, C, and E have all been recommended
to treat a number of diseases, but these vitamins have not been shown to improve
haircoat quality in normal animals. The National Research Council has published guidelines for maintenance, which all the commercial foods meet. Little is known about what
level is required for optimal skin and hair quality. This has led to many anecdotal claims
and products on the market. Mineral therapy is also often recommended to clients. Sulfur,
once believed to be an effective flea repellent, was shown not to be efficacious. 178
Many of the newer supplements contain novel sources for the vitamins, minerals, and
other micronutrients that may improve skin and haircoats. With other organ systems, we
learned the value of some of these supplements, such as glucosamine and chondroitin
sulfate for joints and fiber and fermentable fiber for gastrointestinal disease and diabetes
mellitus. Others, such as the claim that sulfur is a flea repellent, are not true. Some of the
supplements contain a variety of phytonutrients that may be beneficial for overall health,
not just the skin and haircoat. There is some evidence that some of these supplements
may promote improved immune responses and protect against ultraviolet radiation and
skin cancer. 33. 123 Phytonutrients and antioxidant ingredients now being recommended for
skin and haircoat include grape seed extract and B-carotene. We need to keep an open
mind about supplements for skin disease and investigate these newer claims. The authors

210 • Dennatologic Therapy

look forward to the day when we can make accurate statements regarding many of these
newer supplements.

Routine Grooming Care
Dog and cat breeds have many different coat types, so generalization about grooming
details is difficult.P" 172 A few important principles can be emphasized-the most critical
being the frequency of care. When a schedule of grooming is found to suffice for keeping
the pet looking sharp, it should be followed conscientiously. It is better to spend a few
minutes grooming regularly than many hours sporadically.
Excessive shedding of hair into the house environment is greatly decreased by routine
grooming. Products have been marketed that claim to reduce shedding. Substantiation of
these claims appears to relate more to the instructions for use than to the active ingredients. Recommended use of these products involves extensive brushing before and after
each weekly bath. Properly performed brushing, 15 to 30 minutes weekly, greatly decreases the amount of hair shed into the environment, regardless of which shampoo is
used.
Because the client must be motivated to perform grooming regularly, making it easy
is important. If proper facilities, effective tools, and a cooperative patient are combined,
the task of grooming becomes tolerable or even enjoyable. A solid, convenient table with a
nonskid surface and a grooming post with a neck or body sling are helpful. Grooming is
facilitated if performed in a quiet area without distractions. A grooming stand with a chair
is helpful but not necessary.
The proper grooming tools should be clean and in good repair. Comb, brush, claw
clipper and file, towels, cotton balls, and cotton-tipped swabs (Q-Tips) are the vital
implements needed for most breeds. Shampoo, hair-conditioning rinses, ear-cleaning solution, and flea dips are also necessary. Specialized tools (discussed later) are essential for
grooming and conditioning some coats.
The animal and its training can greatly affect the ease of grooming. Regular habits of
good behavior during grooming, established early in life, result in cooperation. Most
properly trained pets either enjoy or tolerate well their grooming care.
Prospective owners should contemplate grooming problems before purchasing a pet.
If time and expense are likely to be obstacles, one should not choose a pet from a
longhaired, wiry, or woolly coated breed, but instead select a short-coated animal that is
easy to groom. An owner should perform simple daily or weekly grooming chores but
should periodically take advantage of a professional grooming service. The grooming needs
of five typical coat types are discussed later.

Cleaning the Skin
The normal skin surface film contains excretory products of skin glands and keratinocytes,
comeocytes, bacteria and dirt, pollen, grains, and mold spores. Excessive amounts of
these, together with altered or abnormal fatty acids, serum, red blood cells, proteinaceous
exudates, degenerating inflammatory cells, and the byproducts of their degradation as well
as bacterial degradation, are found in the surface film of abnormal skin. To promote
health, the skin and coat should be groomed to minimize these accumulations. If proper
skin and coat care is neglected, skin irritation may result or accumulations of debris may
adversely affect a skin disease that is already present.
PREPARATION FOR BATHING
Before dogs are bathed, the haircoat should be brushed out and the claws should be
clipped or filed to keep them short. With frequent filing, the quick recedes and the claw
can be maintained properly. Also, one should check between the toes for foreign objects
and remove hair under the foot between the pads. Care should be exercised when using
scissors between pads. Clippers are safer because they are less apt to produce lacerations.

Dennatologic Therapy • 21 1

If the dog's coat is unkempt and severely matted, the tags and mats should be cut out
before they are wet; otherwise, the mats become set and are more difficult to remove.
The anal sacs should be palpated and expressed, if necessary, before bathing so any
soilage can be removed during the bath. One should place cotton over the anus and, with
the thumb on one side of the anus and the fingers on the other side, press forward and
together to express the sacs. A more complete expression of sac contents can be performed by inserting a gloved finger into the rectum to express each sac separately.
The ears should also receive attention and care before the animal is bathed. The ears
are carefully examined as well as cleaned and dried thoroughly, if necessary (see Chap.
19). Some terriers and poodles may have large amounts of hair growing in the ear canals.
Excessive hair should be plucked from the external ear canal in dogs prone to ear
problems because it may allow cerumen accumulation and contribute to irritation. The
process of plucking may cause irritation in normal ears and should be used only when it is
deemed necessary on the basis of the history and examination of the ear canal. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory medication should be instilled in the ear canal after the plucking is complete and the canal is clean and dry. Pledgets of cotton may be placed firmly in
each ear before bathing to block the entrance of soap and water. After the bath, the
cotton is removed or, if none was applied, a drying agent is put into the ear canal.
In the past, it has been recommended to apply ointments or oils to eyes as a
protection against inadvertent entry of irritants. This should not be done because the oil
vehicle makes rinsing an irritant from the eye more difficult. This is especially true of
lipid-soluble irritants, which may cause more damage if applied to an eye pretreated with
an oil or an ointment. Nothing should be applied to the eyes, and if an irritant (e.g., dip
and soap) enters the eye, it should immediately be rinsed with fresh water.
HAIR CARE PRODUCTS
• Shampoos. Shampoos should remove external dirt, grime, and sebum and leave
the hair soft, shiny, and easy to comb. To accomplish this, they should lather well, rinse
freely, and leave no residue. Optimally, they would remove soil rather than natural oils,
but the natural oils are removed to varying degrees. For some animals, this may require
the use of oil or conditioning rinses. Some shampoos still have a soap base, but most
shampoos are surfactants or detergents with a variety of additives that function as thickeners, conditioners, lime soap dispersants, protein hydrolysates, and perfumes. Dozens of
products are on the market.
Many clients are familiar with pH-balanced shampoos for human use. The same
promotion of pH adjusting for canine shampoos has been recommended. The canine skin
is approximately neutral with a pH of 7 to 7.4, which is different from that of human skin.
Therefore, human pH-adjusted shampoos are not optimal for canine use. Theoretically,
pH products temporarily affect the electrostatic charges in the surface lipid bilayer and
could alter the normal barrier effect. However, the clinical relevance or the documentation of alterations in barrier function related to the pH of a shampoo is lacking in
veterinary medicine.
Soap shampoos work well in soft water. In hard water, they leave a dulling film of
calcium and magnesium soap on the hair unless special lime-dispersing agents are added
to bind calcium, magnesium, and heavy metal ions.
Detergent shampoos are synthetic surfactants or emulsifying agents, usually salts of
Iauryl sulfate. Sodium lauryl ether sulfate (sodium laureth sulfate) is less irritating than
sodium lauryl sulfate. If dogs or cats seem to be irritated by most shampoos, trying a
shampoo with sodium laureth sulfate may prove worthwhile. Such shampoos do not react
with hard water, but they tend to be harsher cleaning agents than soap. This disadvantage
is partially overcome by various additives.
Satisfactory detergents to use as shampoos for normal coats tend to dry the coat and
contain few additives to counter the detergent effect. Conditioners should be used after
detergents. Glycol, glycerol esters, lanolin derivatives, oils, and fatty alcohols are considered superfattening or emollient additives that prevent the complete removal of natural

212 • Dermatologic Therapy

oils or tend to replace them. They also give the hair more luster and, as lubricants, make
it easier to comb .
• Conditioners. Hair conditioners have four main purposes: (1) to reduce static
electricity so that coarse hair does not snarl or become flyaway, (2) to give body to limp
or thin hair, (3) to supply fatty acids or oil to coat the hair and skin, and (4) to deliver
medication to the skin and hair surface in a vehicle that will not be completely rinsed
away or removed. Normal hair maintains relative electric neutrality with a slight negative
charge. However, if clean, dry hair is in a low-humidity environment or is brushed
excessively, it picks up increased negative electric charges. Adjacent hairs that are similarly
charged repel one another and produce the condition known as flyaway.
Conditioners or cream rinses are cationic (positively charged) surfactants or amphoteric materials that neutralize the charge and eliminate flyaway. They are slightly acidic,
which hardens keratin and removes hard water residues. They also contain a fatty or oily
component that adds a film to provide luster. Thus, these products make hair lie flat and
comb easily but they do not provide the body or fluff that some coats require.
Protein conditioners, or body builders, contain oil and protein hydrolysates. Oils add
luster, whereas protein hydrolysates coat the hair and make it seem thicker. This may be a
slight advantage in hair with a dried, cracked, outer cuticle layer, but the effect is actually
minimal. Only a thin film is added, so hair is not strengthened. If the protein is added to
a shampoo rather than used separately, most of it is washed away during rinsing, further
reducing the effect.
• Oil Rinses. Oil rinses are used after a bath to replenish and restore the natural
oils removed by the shampooing. These products are emollients that add luster and
improve the comb ability of the haircoat. They may decrease dry flaky skin and dry flakes
within the haircoat. Oil rinses are primarily oils that require dilution or they will leave the
haircoat too greasy, or they are oil-in-water emulsions that may be diluted or sprayed
directly on the haircoat. The essential fatty acids are often incorporated into these products and are absorbed percutaneously.

BATHING
The dog is placed in a raised tub and is wet completely with warm water. A shower spray
hose makes bathing easier and rinsing much faster. A bland nonmedicated, moisturizing,
or hypoallergenic shampoo should be used for most dogs. The shampoo is applied to the
neck and topline of the dog. More water is added, and a vigorous lather is worked up.
Some owners apply excessive amounts of shampoo when the product is applied right from
the bottle. This is wasteful and can lead to skin irritation because it is difficult to rinse the
heavy concentration of shampoo. Predilution of the shampoo in 5 to 10 parts of water can
help to eliminate this problem.
The lather should be rubbed into short-haired dogs but squeezed into long coats
because rubbing may mat the long hair excessively. One can work a small rubber brush
back and forth through the coat to clean the skin and remove any foreign materials from
the hair. In some short-coated breeds, especially Doberman pinschers and Dalmatians,
washing against the normal hair growth may induce postbathing folliculitis.
The dog's face should be washed and rinsed carefully. Gently placing a finger over
the eyes keeps the eyelids closed and helps to prevent shampoo or rinse water from
entering the eyes. A washcloth is also useful to control lather and keep soap from the
dog's eyes.
The entire coat is rinsed thoroughly. A second lather and rinse may be needed to
wash the dog until the water runs off clear. Thorough rinsing is essential. If the outer coat
is rinsed but soap is left close to the skin, irritation results. This is most common in areas
that tend to be overlooked or difficult to rinse, such as heavily feathered caudal thighs and
axillary, groin, periscrotal, ventral tail, and interdigital areas. The haircoat should be rinsed
until clear, detergent-free water runs off.
In general, except when short-coated breeds are washed or unless medicated sham-

Dennatologic Therapy • 2 I 3

poos necessitating longer contact times are used, the rinsing takes longer than the cleaning phase of bathing. The hair should squeak as it is rinsed. Vinegar, lemon, or bleaching
rinses are not recommended, except for special problems. However, a small amount of
dog or cat coat conditioner or oil can be added to water for the last rinse and adds gloss
to the coat. Flea dips also are necessary in some cases and usually can be mixed with the
conditioner.
The coat should be squeezed to eliminate water and the dog wrapped in a towel and
lifted from the tub to a table. All animals should be protected from chilling and hypothermia during a bath and for several hours afterward, until thoroughly dry. Short-coated dogs
can be toweled almost dry and then lightly brushed and kept confined or calm until dry.
Dogs with medium-length and long coats may be blotted with towels until only damp
and then brushed. Alternatively, they may be placed in a stream of warm air and the coat
can be combed, brushed, and fluffed as needed to accomplish the desired effect.
The frequency of a grooming routine depends on the breed and the individual
animal's needs. In normal dogs not getting dirty, the bathing may be as infrequent as
every few months. Dogs prone to normal dog odor that is noticeable to the client may
require much more frequent bathing, as often as weekly. If normal dogs are bathed
frequently, once monthly or more frequently, conditioners or oil rinses are advisable. The
frequency of bathing needed in dogs with skin disease is generally much greater than with
normal dogs.
Dry baths are sometimes used to avoid the drying influence of water baths, especially
in dogs with long coats. Talc, boric acid powder, or special products available at pet stores
are dusted into the coat and then thoroughly brushed out. With careful application, the
coat is left relatively clean and lustrous. However, dry baths are good for only a quick
cosmetic clean-up. Powder cleaners are actually inefficient: They dry the coat and increase
its static electricity. They should not be used for routine cleaning because they do not
replace bathing. Shampoo and water baths are still the most effective way to clean the
coat thoroughly.

Special Grooming Problems
MATS
Mats can usually be teased apart and combed out if they are small. Small mats behind the
ears and under the legs can be cut off. Larger mats can be slit with a scissors, a knife, or
a mat and tangle splitter and then teased apart with one or two teeth of a comb. A mat
and tangle splitter slices mats so they can be removed more easily, leaving some hair, as
compared with clippers, which remove all hair. Some badly neglected long-coated cats or
dogs may have an almost complete covering of felt matting. The only solution to some of
these unfortunate cases is general anesthesia and complete, close clipping. Extreme care is
necessary to avoid cutting or irritating the skin. Sometimes, the teeth of a comb can be
slipped between the mat and the skin to serve as a shield so that the mat can be safely
scissored away.

TAR OR PAINT
Tar or paint embedded in the coat may be difficult to remove. Small deposits should be
allowed to harden and then cut off. Tar masses can be soaked in vegetable oil or an
emollient oil with a surfactant for 24 hours (and bandaged if needed) to soften the tar,
and then the entire mass can be washed out with soap and water. Dawn (Procter &
Gamble) dish soap was found to be good for removing oil in the haircoat of otters
affected by an oil spill.80 One should never use paint removers or organic solvents such as
kerosene, turpentine, and gasoline to remove tar or paint. They are irritating and toxic and
may produce severe caustic bums. Ether may be used carefully for small areas. Clipping
the tar or paint-coated hair is often the simplest procedure if the cosmetic appearance is
not paramount.

2 I4 • Dermatologic Therapy

GUM
Gum may be more easily removed if first hardened by rubbing with ice and then stripped
or pulled out. 115

ODORS
Odors about a coat usually originate from places such as the mouth, the ears, the feet,
and the perineum. These areas should be checked and washed carefully. Most detergents
remove the typical odors that dogs pick up. In many cases, the odor is an indication of
skin disease (often, superficial bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis) that may not
be noted by the owner. In other cases, excessive lipid accumulation is present and
degreasing agents such as benzoyl peroxide and tar may be useful.
A variety of commercial rinses may be applied, or the coat may be rinsed with a
dilute chlorophyll solution or dilute sodium hypochlorite (in a white animal only). Highly
scented dressings and sprays are objectionable to many people and do not reliably mask
odors. Rarely, dogs are presented for severe body odor that seems to emanate from their
entire body. Physical examination fails to reveal any visible abnormalities. Typically, these
dogs' malodor responds transiently (24 hours) to a variety of shampoos and rinses. We
have had the best results with long-term once-daily antibiotic therapy with lincomycin,
erythromycin, or cephalosporins. Some dogs respond better with twice-weekly vinegarwater (equal parts of each) rinses, but the faint odor of vinegar disturbs some owners. The
cause of this condition is unknown, and it is lifelong.
Skunk odor can be difficult to remove and often takes several treatments. Home
remedies have described such methods as baths in soap and water followed by a rinse in a
dilute ammonia-water solution (5 to 10 ml [1 to 2 tsp] of ammonia in 1 L [1 qt] of water),
vinegar and water, tomato juice, and even toothpaste. We have seen all of these used with
some success, though time and multiple applications may be needed. A commercial
product, Skunk Odor Eliminator (The Bramton Co., Dallas, TX), has been recommended,
though, again, multiple applications may be required.!"

CLIPPING
Clipping is beneficial when topical treatment will be used. Clipping permits thorough
cleaning, adequate skin contact, and a more economical application of the desired medicament. In many cases, complete removal of the coat may be preferred, but usually,
clipping the local area suffices. This should be done neatly to avoid disfigurement. If the
hair over the involved area is clipped closely (against the grain with a No. 40 clipper)
while a border around this is clipped less closely (with the grain), the regrowth of hair
more quickly blends the area into the normal coat pattern.
Clipping should always be discussed with the owner to obtain approval. This contact
is especially important when treating show animals or those with long coats, such as
Yorkshire terriers, Old English sheepdogs, and Afghan hounds. The corded breeds such as
Pulis and Komondors take years to regrow clipped cords; therefore, clipping should be
avoided unless absolutely necessary. All needless clipping should be avoided. During
clipping, a vacuum cleaner can be used to remove all loose hair and debris. Shampoo
therapy may be an acceptable alternative to clipping in some cases. It may remove surface
lipids and clean the skin and hair enough that topical dips are able to be effectively
applied to the skin surface. In other cases, the desired active ingredients may be incorporated into the shampoo formulation.

Comments on Grooming Cats
In general, the grooming implements used for dogs serve adequately for cats. 76, 146 However, special applications are outlined here. There is absolutely no substitute for routine
daily grooming or for grooming every second or third day. Cats detest bathing and

Dermatologic Therapy • 215

dematting and can be most resentful of rough treatment. Even when cats are petted,
many of them slip away afterward to rearrange their haircoat thoroughly by licking and
grooming themselves.
GROOMING NEEDS OF VARIOUS COAT TYPES
From the grooming standpoint, cats have three types of coats-the shorthaired, single
coat; the shorthaired, double coat; and the long coat.
The shorthaired, single coat is typified by Siamese, Burmese, Havana brown, Rex,
Korat, and domestic shorthaired cats. These cats can be bathed in shampoo and water,
quickly dried to avoid chilling, and brushed and combed against the coat to remove dead
hair. Final brushing follows the direction of natural hair growth. A fine metal comb and
natural boar bristle brush are the only implements needed.
The shorthaired, double coat is typified by Abyssinian, Manx, Russian blue, and
American shorthaired cats. The double coat is composed of two sets of hair. The long
guard hair gives the coat its color, and the dense, short undercoat provides warmth. Both
sets of hair are essential in these breeds. The basic coat care of this group is similar to
that used for single coats except that caution must be employed because overgrooming
can destroy the coat. Loss of the long guard hairs may give the coat a patchy or motheaten appearance.
The longhaired coat is typified by Persians and Himalayans. Several sizes of metal
combs and a boar bristle brush are necessary for grooming these breeds. The kittens
should be started with grooming at 4 weeks of age.
Older kittens and adults can be bathed with mild shampoo and water. They can be
placed on a slanted window screen in a tub. Cats feel secure on the wire and stay put, yet
water passes through easily. They are rinsed well and dried quickly with a towel and warm
air blower. This fluffs the coat and gives it body. One should not bathe cats frequently
and not within 2 weeks preceding a show. Cats almost never require bathing.
Mats tend to form behind the ears and under the chin, the legs, and the tail. The
skin under the mat becomes irritated. Mats can be prevented by daily combing and
brushing.
Some breeders dry-clean the coats with powder or talc sprinkled into the coat and
carefully brushed out with a motion up and away from the body. This is rarely a
satisfactory grooming method. If powder is left in the hair, it resembles unsightly dandruff
and is highly objectionable.
The ruff or tail of a longhaired cat is never clipped. The eyes and nasal area should
be cleaned to remove exudates that may accumulate.
SPECIAL FELINE GROOMING PROBLEMS
A eat's claws should be clipped only if necessary. They soon grow out again and are honed
sharply.
Cats' ears are much less prone to infection than are dogs' ears, but they should always
be checked and cleaned if needed. Young cats are especially predisposed to ear mite
infections.
The large supracaudal organ on the dorsal surface of the tail is a mass of hyperactive
sebaceous glands that may cause trouble if neglected. Breeders call the problem stud tail,
although it occurs in both sexes. A waxy, unsightly accumulation builds up in the area if
proper hygiene is neglected. The exudate can be removed by applying powder to soak it
up, by applying a thin oil to soften it, or by sponging the area with alcohol or detergents
as solvents. The oil can usually be brushed or washed off with shampoos satisfactorily.
Periodic cleaning should prevent any future problem.

• CLIENT COMPLIANCE
The successful treatment of skin disorders depends to a large extent on the client. In
addition to supplying the historical information needed for diagnosis, the client adminis-

216 • Dennatologic Therapy
ters most prescribed therapies. The successful management of many dermatologic diseases
necessitates long-term or lifelong therapy, often involving more than one medicament.
The client must also give the medications correctly at the proper intervals and for the
proper duration.
Many animals have been referred to us after the correct diagnosis was made, appropriate treatment was recommended, but treatment failed because of improper execution
by the owner. Excellent diagnosticians often have poor results if they are not able to
interact with clients effectively because this often leads to failure in compliance. These
failures may occur for a variety of reasons. Understanding the possible reasons for poor
compliance, recognizing when treatment failures occur, and developing corrective measures is an art that the successful clinician develops.
The reasons for poor client compliance include the following:
1. Failure of the client to understand the importance of giving the treatment
2. Lack of education of the client regarding the proper treatment
3. Improper frequency of or interval between medication applications
4. Faulty application, which can take multiple forms (Table 3-1)
5. Inadequate duration of therapy
6. Client's lack of time or labor-intensive treatment
7. Disagreeable cosmetic appearance or odor of treatment
8. Perceived danger of treatment
9. Premature discontinuation of treatment because of perceived lack of efficacy
10. Discontinuation of treatment because it was too difficult or not tolerated by
the pet
Many of these problems are avoidable if the clinician or the veterinary assistants adequately explain the treatment plan.
It is important to make the client aware of potential problems, and these possible
difficulties should be discussed before clients leave the office. We encounter numerous
cases wherein the clients have unused treatments at home. This is particularly true of flea
products: Because the treatment was too labor-intensive or the treatment appeared ineffective, the client discontinued it.
The successful clinician tries to prevent these treatment failures. For example, if
clients do not or cannot dip their cats, a flea collar, although normally considered less
effective than a properly applied dip, becomes relatively more efficacious. The best flea
dip ever invented never works sitting on a shelf. Some clients may not readily admit that a
treatment will be too difficult or unacceptable, and therefore alternatives may not be
offered.
Another major factor influencing client compliance is the use of multiple therapeutic

• Table 3-1

REASONS FOR IMPROPER TREATMENT
APPLICATION

REASON

EXAMPLES

Incorrect dosage

Not giving the prescribed dose
Improperly diluting topical products
Adding to food bowl, resulting in incomplete intake
Giving drugs with food that should be given on an empty
stomach
Giving TID drugs with breakfast, lunch, and dinner and not
closer to q8h
Not leaving shampoo on long enough
Dipping for scabies but not treating the ears and face
Failing to have dip penetrate the haircoat
Not shaving the hair in thick-coated long-haired pets
Rinsing dips out of the haircoat

Interactions with other substances
Incorrect frequency
Improper duration
Failure to apply the proper site
Application that does not reach the skin
Failure to understand the application
method

Dennatologic Therapy • 217

agents. Often, the best management of a dermatologic disease, particularly a chronic one,
is a therapeutic regimen or plan that entails the use of multiple products. This makes
education of the client more difficult and time-consuming as well as potentially more
confusing. Despite these problems, the best long-term control is often achieved by using
such a plan versus a single medicament.
Particularly with chronic skin problems, the education of the client regarding their
pet's disease becomes critical. Over the life of the pet, many different therapies may be
required and changes in the disease or secondary manifestations are likely. The client
needs to be educated about the likely course of the disease as well as the need for followup and therapeutic modifications. The importance of maintenance therapy must be emphasized.

• TOPICAL THERAPY
Topical therapy has always played a large role in dermatology because of the obvious
access to the affected tissue." 88, 156, 158. 162, 172, 218 In the past, topical therapy was used for
treating localized lesions and ectoparasite infestations. In the last 15 years, topical applications have become even more prominent and continue to flourish in treating skin disease,
Undoubtedly, this growth in topical therapy reflects multiple factors, which may include
(1) the development of more products, better delivery systems, and active ingredients, (2)
the reduction in systemic absorption or effects and adverse reactions, and (3) the recognition of the adjunctive and synergistic effects in the overall management of numerous skin
diseases. These factors are also the advantages that topical therapy offers to the clinician
and the pet owner.
There are disadvantages, however. In general, topical therapy is much more timeconsuming and labor-intensive than systemic therapy. Understanding the proper use and
application of topical therapy is also important, and therefore client education and client
compliance become harder to achieve. Localized adverse reactions not seen with systemic
therapy may occur, most commonly irritant reactions.
Topical therapy is often adjunctive, and it may significantly increase the cost of the
overall therapeutic plan. Some topical agents may be so costly that their use is limited to
localized lesions. On the other hand, appropriate topical therapy may greatly reduce the
need for systemic therapy. The clinician needs to consider the potential benefits and
disadvantages, the client's preferences, and the patient's needs when deciding on the use
of topical therapy.
When a clinician elects to use topical therapy, several factors must be considered.
First and foremost is, What is the purpose or desired result of the topical therapy? Is this
the sole therapy, or is it adjunctive to other nontopical therapies? What type of delivery
system best facilitates obtaining the desired result? What active ingredients are used for
this purpose? As previously discussed, patient and client considerations are paramount.
Table 3-2 lists the most common delivery systems and formulations of active ingredients
used in veterinary dermatology. The amount of use for each type of product relative to
the others is based solely on our opinions and clinical impressions.

Factors That Influence Drug Effects on the Skin
Topical medications consist of active ingredients incorporated in a vehicle that facilitates
application to the skin. In selecting a vehicle, one must consider the solubility of the drug
in the vehicle, the rate of release from the vehicle, the ability of the vehicle to hydrate
the stratum corneum, the stability of the active agent in the vehicle, and the interactions
(chemical and physical) among the vehicle, the active agent, and the stratum corneum.
The vehicle is not always inert and many have important therapeutic effects.
When topical medications are used, one basic question is whether the drug penetrates
the skin and, if so, how deeply. Absorption varies highly, and most drugs penetrate only
1% to 2% after 16 to 24 hours. 8 . 54 However, even in the same vehicle, similar drugs may

....,
CXl

• Table 3-2

TOPICAL FORMULATIONS AND RELATIVE
EFFICACY OF INCORPORATED ACTIVE AGENTS

TOPICAL
FORMULATIONS

Shampoo
Rinse
Leave on conditioners
Powder
Lotion
Spray
Cream or ointment
Gels

ASTRINGENT

X
X

XXX
XX

-

EMOLLIENT

ANTISEBORRHEIC

ANTIPRURITIC

ANTIBACTERIAL

ANTIMYCOTIC

ANTIPARASITIC

XX
XXX
XXX

XXX

XX
XX
XXX
X
XXX
XXX
XX

XXX
X
XXX
X
XX
X
XXX
XX

X
XXX
XX

XX
XXX

?

X

-

X
XXX
X

X
XX
X
X

-

XX
X
X
X

Relative use based on author's opinions and clinical impressions.
- = not used; X = infrequently used or use associated with lower efficacy; XX = occasionally used; XXX = commonly used and efficacious.

XXX

ANTIINFLAMMATORY

ULTRAVIOLET
SCREEN

X
X
X
X
XXX
XX
XXX

X
XXX
XXX

Dermatologic Therapy • 219

vary dramatically in their absorption.P This was exemplified in a study with three organophosphate insecticides applied topically in three different vehicles.I" With only one organophosphate (parathion) of the three tested, the vehicle dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
increased absorption from 4% to 5% up to 15% to 30%. In some cases (e.g., insecticides),
the absorbability greatly influences the potential for side effects.
Clinical efficacy and absorption are not synonymous; absorption is only one factor in
efficacy. Some drugs in an insoluble form in the vehicle have only a surface effect. Once
absorbed, a drug must also interact with specific receptors before an action will result.
The drug's affinity for the receptors as well as local factors that effect this drug-receptor
interaction are also important." Absorption of drugs through the skin involves many
variables. There are physicochemical factors related to the topical formulation and biological factors." The physicochemical factors involve the interactions between the drug and
the vehicle, the drug and the skin, and the vehicle and the skin. Some of these factors are
determined by the concentration of the drug, the drug's movement between the vehicle
and the skin, the diffusion coefficient, and the local pH.
1. The concentration of the drug and its solubility in the vehicle affects absorption.

The package label gives the percentage of drug concentration, not the percentage
of solubility. In addition to concentration, the solubility of the drug and the
solubilizing capacity of the vehicle affect drug absorption. In general, poor solubility and excessive solubilizing capacity decrease the rate of absorption." Usually,
ointment vehicles for topical corticosteroids increase solubility and drug delivery, so
systemic effects after topical use are more common-and potentially dangerous.
2. The drug must move from the vehicle through the skin barrier to be effective. The
solubility of the drug in the horny layer relative to its solubility in the vehicle is
described by the partition coefficient. The concentration of the drug in the barrier,
not in the vehicle, is what determines the diffusion force. Increased lipid solubility
favors drug penetration because the stratum corneum is lipophilic.
3. The diffusion coefficient is a measure of the extent to which the barrier interferes
with the drug's mobility. The stratum corneum is unsurpassed as an unfavorable
environment for drug penetration. Physical disruption of the epidermal barrier by
the use of lipid solvents, keratolytic agents, or cellulose-tape stripping of the top
layers of cells increases the potential for absorption. In some cases, the vehicle
itself may be able to diffuse through the stratum corneum and carries any dissolved drug with it. DMSO facilitates cutaneous penetration of some substances.
Moisture and occlusive dressings enhance percutaneous absorption as well. Large
molecular size results in poor mobility and poor absorption.
4. The pH of the drug's local environment may also affect absorption by altering the
amount of drug in its unionized form. Many drugs are either weak acids or bases
and occur in an ionized and unionized form. In general, the unionized form is
more readily absorbed; this amount may change as the local pH is altered. Hi
The active ingredient of the drug may interact with all other components in the
formulation. In practice, the addition of other ingredients or the mixing of ingredients on
the skin such as ear cleanser followed by an ear treatment may alter the drug's effect.
Drug effects may be altered by interactions between the drug and the new drug or its
vehicle, or by interactions between the new drug or vehicle and the original vehicle.
Changes that may occur include inactivation of the drug by chemical bonding or precipitation, changes in pH, allowing decomposition of the drugs by altering the stabilizing effects
of the vehicle, and altering the concentration of the drug. We have seen cases in which
1 % miconazole lotion is mixed in equal amounts with another ear product and fails to
eliminate Malassezia from an ear canal. The unaltered 1% miconazole is then used alone
and is effective.
Temperature and hydration of the skin can affect the interaction among the drug, the
vehicle, and the skin. Hydration probably plays a greater role than temperature in affecting absorption. In general, permeability to drugs increases as the hydration of the stratum
corneum increases." 9

220 • Dermatologic Therapy
Biological factors also affect drug absorption. The body region treated greatly influences absorption. In humans, the amount of hydrocortisone being absorbed varied tremendously, in descending order, on the scrotum, the forehead, the forearm, and the
plantar foot.,54 Age is an important factor, with newborns experiencing greater absorption
than adolescents, who experience greater absorption than adults. Obviously, the health and
condition of the skin is important because inflamed, abraded, or otherwise damaged skin
often absorbs more drug. Blood flow also affects absorption. Greater blood flow favors
increased systemic absorption.

Hydrotherapy
Water is often overlooked as a therapeutic agent, especially when it is applied with a
shampoo, as a rinse, or as a component of many lotions. Hydrotherapy may be used to
moisten the stratum corneum, to dry out the epidermis, to cool or heat the skin, to soften
surface crusts, and to clean the skin. Increased effects occur by adding other agents
(topical active agents, see p. 226).
Water may be applied as a wet dressing or in baths. Frequent periodic renewal of wet
dressings (15 minutes on, several hours off) prolongs the effect, but if more continuous
therapy or occlusive coverings are used, the skin becomes overly moistened, the skin
temperature rises, and undesirable maceration occurs. This is less likely if the wet dressings are left open.
Hydrotherapy can hydrate or dehydrate the skin, depending on how it is managed.
The application of loose, damp gauze compresses for 15 minutes and then removal for 1
hour promote evaporation of water from the gauze and from the subadjacent skin surface
and are drying to the underlying tissues. If water is maintained on the skin surface
constantly by wet towels, soaks, or baths, the skin hydrates as water is taken up by keratin
and hair. If a film of oil is applied immediately after soaking (occlusive rinses), evaporation
of water (transpiration) is hindered and the skin retains moisture.
The water may be cool or above body temperature. Whirlpool baths, with or without
detergents and antiseptics added, make gentle, effective cleaning possible. These treatments may be used to remove crusts and scales, to clean wounds and fistulae, to rehydrate skin, to reduce pain and pruritus, and to provide prophylaxis for patients prone to
decubital problems, urine scalds, and other ills. Ten to 15 minutes of therapy once or
twice daily is adequate. The patients should be toweled and placed in an air stream drier
to dry. Other topical medications can be applied later, if needed.
In hydrotherapy, moisture is the specific agent, and various additives change its
actions only slightly but add their own effects. Astringents, antipruritics, moisturizers,
parasiticides, and antibiotics are common additives. In general, water treatment removes
crusts, bacteria, and other debris and greatly reduces the possibility of secondary infection.
It promotes epithelialization and allays the symptoms of pain and burning. Cool water is
antipruritic. It also softens keratin. The suppleness and softness of the skin are due to its
water content, not to the oils on the surface.l" Dryness of the skin is recognized when
anyone of the following is present: roughness of the surface, scaliness, inflexibility of the
horny layer, and fissuring with possible inflammation.
Normal skin is not a waterproof covering but is constantly losing water to the
environment by transpiration. This loss depends on body temperature, environmental
temperature, and relative humidity. The stratum corneum, composed of corneocytes and
an intercellular matrix lipid bilayer, is the major deterrent to water loss. The lipids of this
layer are derived from phospholipids and lipids secreted by the keratinocytes as they
migrate to the stratum corneum and from sebum. Dry skin may result from excessive
transpiration of water.
Sebum on the skin or externally applied lipid films tend to make the surface feel
smoother. The flexibility of keratin is directly related to its moisture content. The amount
of water that the horny layer receives from the epidermis and the transepidermal loss are
major factors determining moisture content. The transepidermal loss from the stratum
corneum partially depends on the environment, especially the relative humidity. Water

Dennatologic Therapy • 221

content of the horny layer can be increased by applying occlusive dressings or agents to
prevent loss, by adding water with baths or wet dressings, or by using hygroscopic
medications to attract water.

Topical Formulations
Active medications may be applied to the skin by a variety of delivery systems. These
different delivery systems include, but are not limited to, the following formulations:
shampoos; rinses; powders; lotions; sprays; creams, emulsions, and ointments; and gels.
Each type of formulation has advantages and disadvantages that the clinician should
consider when selecting a topical medication. Besides incorporating active ingredients,
each type of formulation contains ingredients that act as the vehicle for delivering the
active agents. These vehicles may also have certain therapeutic, irritant, or cosmetic
effects, making the overall formulation more or less desirable.
In general, vehicles contain ingredients to adjust the pH, stabilize the active agents,
prolong the effects of the active ingredients, promote the delivery of the active agents to
the skin surface or into or through the stratum corneum, and make the product cosmetically pleasing (e.g., fragrance). The selection of the topical formulation depends on a
variety of factors, most notably the surface area to be treated, the need for residual
activity, the presence of hair in the area to be treated, and the nature of the lesion (e.g.,
moist or dry).
The active ingredients are often available in a variety of different formulations and
delivery systems. In general, they have the same basic activity regardless of the formulation, but their ease of use, cost, and efficacy for the desired purpose are affected by the
formulation and the method of application. The following categories of active agents are
used: astringents, or drying agents; emollients and moisturizers; antiseborrheics; antipruritics; antibacterials; antifungals; antiparasitics, anti-inflammatory agents; and ultraviolet
screens. The following discussion describes first the different delivery systems and then
the types of active ingredients.

SHAMPOOS
Medicated shampoos contain additional ingredients that enhance or add other actions to
that of the shampoo.v" With most shampoo formulations, the active drugs have a limited
contact time because they are removed during the rinsing of the shampoo base. Some
medicaments may have enough opportunity for effect or for limited absorption during a
prolonged shampoo, and their addition may be justified (e.g., insecticides, salicylic acid,
sulfur, tar, and antiseptics). Medicated shampoos are valuable in that they may be used
for diseases involving large areas of the body or localized lesions.
Newer formulations of shampoos have been developed that utilize sustained-release
microvesicle technology. In one, the microvesicles have an outer lipid membrane and
contain water (Novasomes, EVSCO). The lipid membrane binds to hair and skin and has
a long-term moisturizing effect as the microvesicles break down (Fig. 3-1A and B). This
counteracts the drying that may occur with some medications and is therapeutic for dry
skin. However, the active medication is not incorporated and will still be rinsed away.
The second microvesicle technology (Spherulites, Virbac) actually incorporates different ingredients, such as salicylic acid and sulfur, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate, benzalkonium
chloride, oatmeal extract, glycerin, and urea, into multiple layers of these microvesicles.
Also, these microvesicles have multiple (10 to 1000) layers that slowly break down (Fig.
3-1C). With the breakdown of each layer, the active ingredients and the surfactants that
make up these layers are released onto the hair and skin. The microvesicles can be made
with different charges on the exterior, and by making them positively charged they bind
with the negatively charged hair and skin (Fig 3-1D). Chitosanide has been used to make
the microvesicles called spherulites. Besides supplying the outer cationic surface, chitosanide is an active moisturizing agent and is hygroscopic.
Efficacy is determined by proper use as well as active ingredients. It is imperative

222 • Dennatologic Therapy

FIGURE 3-1. A, Novasome attached to canine hair shaft. B, Scanning electron micrograph of a novasome showing the
multiple layers and large cargo hold. C, Scanning electron micrograph of a sphemlite showing the multiple layers. D,
Scanning electron micrographs showing spherulites attached to hair shafts. (Figures courtesy EVSCO and Virbac.)

that products be applied properly, left on for sufficient contact time, and then properly
rinsed. Education of the client regarding their use is an important element and time well
spent. The client should be instructed to use a clock to determine the correct contact
time because subjective assessments are often inadequate. Contact time starts after the
shampoo is applied, not when the bath begins. More severely affected regions should be
the first areas to be shampooed. Sometimes, problem areas benefit from a second lathering before the final rinse.
Pharmaceutical companies provide a multitude of medicated shampoos, which often
have specific indications and contraindications. It is important to become familiar with a
few (perhaps one of each type) and to thoroughly understand the ingredients and their
concentration and actions. Choosing the mildest or most client-pleasing shampoo that
produces the desired actions often increases compliance. Strong shampoos can be harmful
as well as helpful.
The clinician must evaluate the whole animal when selecting active ingredients, and
some animals may benefit from the simultaneous use of different products. Although one
shampoo may be recommended for the whole body, another shampoo may be applied to a
more localized region. The case of an Irish setter with idiopathic seborrhea with truncal
scaling, dry coat, and localized patches of comedones with pyoderma and alopecia on the
ventral chest is an example. A topical antiseborrheic containing sulfur and salicylic acid
may be preferred for most of the body but may not be potent enough for the ventral

Dermatologic Therapy • 223

region. A benzoyl peroxide shampoo may be used on just the ventral thorax because of its
superior antibacterial and follicular flushing effect.
Certain principles should be kept in mind when using medicated shampoos:
1. Clipping the haircoat. Clipping the haircoat and keeping the haircoat short may be
critical to the proper use and maximal benefit of the product.
2. Premedicated shampoo bathing. It is often a good idea to remove grease, debris,
and dirt with a nonmedicated shampoo, such as baby shampoo, or a dishwashing
detergent. In this way, the medicated shampoo is better able to contact the skin,
less product is used, and less expense is incurred.
3. Contact time. The shampoo should be allowed to remain in contact with the skin
for 10 to 15 minutes. This allows the active ingredients to be effective and allows
for the hydration of the stratum corneum. This time should be counted from the
time lathering is finished and, for some owners, may be best measured with an
actual timer.
4. Explanation/demonstration. It is important to explain, and perhaps demonstrate,
the entire process of shampooing. This incudes application and removal of the
product.

Medicated shampoos are often classified on the basis of their primary activity or
function.
1. Emollients and moisturizers are often present in hypoallergenic shampoos and
many better-quality cleansing shampoos for normal skin and haircoat. They are
used when pets will be bathed frequently (weekly or more often) or for pets with
slightly dry or scaly haircoats. Ingredients that moisturize are fatty acids and lipids,
urea, glycerin, colloidal oatmeal, and chitosanide.
2. Antiparasitic shampoos are commonly used, but they are generally not as efficacious as antiparasitic rinses (see Chap. 6). Their main use is for quick removal of
fleas in puppies, kittens, and debilitated animals. They are often ineffective for
adequate long-term flea control. The most common ingredients are pyrethrins and
synthetic pyrethroids.
3. Antiseborrheic shampoos usually contain salicylic acid, sulfur, tar, and selenium
sulfide in various combinations and strengths. They are indicated in keratinization
defects (for details, see Chap. 14). They are also indicated in any other disorder
associated with excessive scaling of the skin.
4. Antibacterial shampoos contain disinfectants or antibiotics such as chlorhexidine,
benzoyl peroxide, iodine, ethyl lactate, benzalkonium chloride, triclosan, and sulfur.
Other ingredients with less effect include quaternary ammonium compounds and
phenols (both not to be used in cats), alcohols, and parabens. These products are
indicated whenever there is superficial bacterial infection (see Chap. 4 for discussions of their specific use). A common indication for long-term use is in the
allergic dog that is still prone to recurrent folliculitis even though the pruritus is
controlled with the allergy therapy. In these situations, nonirritating, nondrying
shampoos with antibacterial agents are often beneficial if used regularly.
5. Antimycotic shampoos contain disinfectants or antifungal agents such as chlorhexidine, sulfur, selenium sulfide, miconazole, and ketoconazole (see Chap. 5). They
are used mainly as adjunctive therapy for dermatophytosis (to achieve a quick
decrease of contagion) and Malassezia dermatitis. They are not effective in treating
dermatophytosis.v They have been recommended as sole therapy for Malassezia
derrnatitis.l-? They may be used alone, as adjunctive therapy, or as a preventive to
decrease the recurrence rate. A product that combines two active ingredients (2%
chlorhexidine and 2% miconazole) has been reported to have increased efficacy as
a sole therapy. III
6. Antipruritic or anti-inflammatory agents, such as 1% hydrocortisone, 0.01% fluocinolone, 2% diphenhydramine, 1% pramoxine, colloidal oatmeal, and moisturizers,
are found in a variety of shampoo formulations (see Chap. 8). In general, they are

224 • Dennatologic Therapy
adjunctive treatments and are not effective as the sole therapy unless they are used
every 1 to 2 days. This high frequency of use is usually not acceptable to owners.
The topical fluocinolone shampoos have been shown not to be systemically absorbed in the dog. lO • 191 Controlled studies of their efficacy are lacking.

RINSES
Rinses are made by mixing concentrated solutions or soluble powders with water. They
are usually poured, sponged, or sprayed onto the animal's body. Similar to the case with
shampoos, they may be used to treat large areas of the body. Rinses are generally a costeffective and efficacious method to deliver topical active ingredients such as moisturizers,
antipruritic agents, parasiticides, and antifungal agents.
Rinses that dry on the pet's skin leave a residual layer of active ingredients and
therefore have more prolonged effects than application by shampoo therapy. Rinses are
often used after a medicated or cleaning shampoo. If the active ingredient to be applied is
lipid dispersed, shampooing may remove the normal surface lipids and decrease the
longevity of the active ingredients. In these situations, adding a small amount of safflower
oil or lipid-containing moisturizer may help to prolong the effect. This is most commonly
recommended for lipid-soluble (petroleum distillate - based) parasiticidal agents.
Rinses are our preferred method of delivery for most topical medications other than
antibacterials and antiseborrheics, which require whole-body coverage.

POWDERS
Powders are pulverized organic or inorganic solids that are applied to the skin in a thin
film. In some cases, they are made to be added to water for use as a rinse, to liquids to
form "shake lotions," or to ointments to form pastes. Some powders (talc, starch, zinc
oxide) are inert and have a physical effect; other powders (sulfur) are active ingredients
that have a chemical or antimicrobial effect. Powders are used to dry the skin and to cool
and lubricate intertriginous areas. Most often, powders are used with parasiticidal agents
(flea powders) and locally with anti-inflammatory agents (Neo-Predef powder, Pharmacia
& Upjohn). Some powders may contain antimicrobials for use on localized lesions and,
although not yet available in the United States, an enilconazole powder has shown promise for the treatment of dermatophytosis.
The affected skin should be cleaned and dried before the powder is applied. Powder
buildup or caking should be avoided, but if it occurs, wet compresses or soaks can gently
remove the excess. On long-coated animals, a fine powder is used as a retention vehicle
for insecticides and fungicides. Powders dry the coat and skin and may accumulate in the
environment, making them less desirable for whole-body use. Some owners find powders
irritating to their own respiratory mucosa. We use powders infrequently and prefer other
delivery systems.

LOTIONS
Lotions are liquids in which medicinal agents are dissolved or suspended. Some are
essentially liquid powders because a thin film of powder is left on the skin when the
liquid evaporates. Lotions tend to be more drying (because of their water or alcohol base)
than liniments, which have an oily base. Newer lotions tend to use more propylene glycol
and water with less or no alcohol. Drying, cooling lotions contain alcohol, whereas soothing, moisturizing lotions usually do not. These medications tend to be cooling, antipruritic,
and drying (depending on the base).
Lotions are vehicles for active ingredients such as 1% hydrocortisone with aluminum
acetate (Hydro-B 1020, Butler; Hydro-Plus, Phoenix), 0.1% betamethasone valerate (Betatrex, Savage), 1% hydrocortisone (Curticalm, DVM), 1% pramoxine (Relief, DVM), 1%
diphenhydramine with calamine and camphor (Caladryl, Parke-Davis), malaleuca, and aloe
vera. The liquid preparations can be applied repeatedly, but they should not be allowed to

Dennatologic Therapy • 225

build up. In general, lotions are indicated for acute oozing dermatoses and are contraindicated in dry, chronic conditions. They are most often used to deliver localized treatment
with astringents and antipruritic, anti-inflammatory, and antifungal agents. They occasionally carry ultraviolet screens and antiseborrheic agents.
SPRAYS

A variety of topical lotions are available in pump spray bottles. Most commonly, they are
used when relatively larger body areas are to be treated and when the product needs to
be applied to only the haircoat or small, nonhaired areas. Rinses may also be applied by
pump spray bottles, but if skin contact is needed, thorough soaking through the haircoat is
required. Sprays are most commonly used with emollients or moisturizers that are lightly
applied and then rubbed into the coat, antiparasitic agents (particularly those with repellent activity), and antipruritic agents for local lesions. Newer sprays have antimicrobial
activity such as 4% chlorhexidine.
Antipruritic sprays contain agents such as 1% hydrocortisone (Cortispray, DVM), 2%
diphenhydramine (Histacalm, Virbac), 1% pramoxine (Relief, DVM; Dermal Soothe,
EVSCO), hamamelis extract with menthol (Dermacool, Virbac), and tar (LyTar, DVM).
Sprays are also frequently used to apply astringents and anti-inflammatory agents, such as
1% hydrocortisone with aluminum acetate. Occasionally, sprays are used for antifungal
agents and the application of ultraviolet screens to the inguinal region. Sprays are valuable
for local application to interdigital webs, ventral paws, and concave pinnae.
CREAMS, EMULSIONS, AND OINTMENTS

Creams and ointments lubricate and smooth skin that is roughened. They form a protective covering that reduces contact with the environment. Certain occlusive types may
reduce water loss. They also transport medicinal agents into follicular orifices and keep
drugs in intimate contact with the horny layer. Creams and ointments are mixtures of
grease or oil and water that are emulsified with high-speed blenders. Emulsifiers, coloring
agents, and perfumes are added to improve the physical characteristics of the product.
Pastes are highly viscous ointments into which large amounts of powder are incorporated.
Although pastes may be tolerated on slightly exudative skin (the powder takes up water),
in general, creams and ointments are contraindicated in oozing areas.
A wide variation in characteristics of the products is determined by the relative
amount and melting point of the oils used. This can be illustrated by comparing cold
cream and vanishing cream. Cold cream is mostly oil with a little water. The oils have a
low melting point, so when the water evaporates a thick, greasy film is left on the skin. A
vanishing cream, on the other hand, is mostly water with oils that have a high melting
point. When the water evaporates, a thin film of fat is left on the skin. This waxlike film
does not feel greasy. Urea added to creams also decreases the greasy feel and, as a
hygroscopic agent, helps to moisturize the stratum corneum.
Emulsions are oily or fatty substances that have been dispersed in water. As a group,
they have a composition between that of lotions and ointments. Emulsions are thicker
than lotions but thinner than ointments. They are similar to creams, which for the most
part have replaced the use of emulsions in small animal practice. Emulsions are of two
types: oil dispersed in water and water dispersed in oil. Although both types are used as
vehicles, the former dilutes with water, loses water rapidly, and therefore is cooling. The
latter type dilutes with oil and loses its water slowly. In both cases, after the water
evaporates, the action of the vehicle on the skin is no different from that of the oil and
emulsifYing agent alone. Thus, the characteristics of the residual film are those of the oily
phase of the vehicle.
These bases are commonly used as vehicles for other agents. They have the advantage
of easy application, give mechanical protection, and are soothing, antipruritic, and softening. The more oily creams and ointments tend to be occlusive, which facilitates hydration
of the stratum corneum and often increases penetration of incorporated active ingredients.

226 • Dermatologic Therapy

The disadvantage of their use in the hairy skin of animals is that they are occlusive,
greasy, heat-retaining, and messy, and they may produce a folliculitis because of occlusion
of pilosebaceous orifices. These types of medication should be applied with gentle massage several times daily to maintain a thin film on the skin. Thick films are wasteful,
occlusive, and messy to surroundings. An obvious film of ointment left on the skin surface
means that too much has been applied.
Water-washable ointment bases such as polyethylene glycol (Carbowax 1500) can be
readily removed with water. Oily bases are not freely water washable. It is important for
the clinician to understand the uses and advantages of these types of bases because the
total effect on the skin is caused by the vehicle as well as its active ingredient.
Hydrophobic oils (e.g., mineral oil and sesame oil) mix poorly with water. They
contain few polar groups (-OH, -COOH, and so on). These oils contact the skin,
spread easily, and are often incorporated into emulsion-type vehicles. Because they are
hydrophobic, it is difficult for water to pass through a film of these oils, and they are
occlusive. They retain heat and water, and thick films of the more viscid forms are messy
and may get on articles in contact with the pet.
Hydrophilic oils are miscible with water. They contain many polar groups, and those
oils with the greatest number are most soluble in water. Although they are ointments only
in terms of their physical characteristics, the polyethylene glycols are alcohols that are
readily miscible with water. Polymers with a molecular weight greater than 1000 are solid
at room temperature, but a slight rise in body temperature causes melting to form an oily
film. (Carbowax 1500 is such a product.) It mixes with skin exudates well, is easily washed
off with water, and is less occlusive than other bases.
The use of creams, emulsions, and ointments is limited to localized, relatively small
lesions. Most commonly, they are used with antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and ultraviolet radiation-blocking agents. They are often the most efficacious delivery system for
areas needing moisturization or keratolytic effects, but their application is usually limited
to localized areas such as nasal planum, paws, and elbows.

GELS
Gels are topical formulations composed of combinations of propylene glycol, propylene
gallate, disodiumethylenediamine tetra-acetate, and carboxypolymethylene, with additives
to adjust the pH. They act as a clear, colorless, thixotropic base and are greaseless and
water-miscible. The active ingredients incorporated in commercially used bases of this
type are completely in solution.
Gels are being more widely used because, despite their oily appearance, they can be
rubbed into the skin completely and do not leave the skin with a sticky feeling. Gels are
relatively preferable to creams and ointments because they pass through the haircoat to
the skin and are not messy. Most commonly, they are used for localized lesions for which
antimicrobial or antiseborrheic effects are desired.
The most common ingredient is benzoyl peroxide for areas of bacterial pyoderma and
follicular hyperkeratosis (such as acne) or areas of comedones. (Examples of gels used in
veterinary medicine with benzoyl peroxide are OxyDex, DVM; Pyoben, Virbac). However,
because they are cosmetically tolerated better than creams and ointments, their use is
expanding to include virtually any ingredient that can be stabilized in a gel form. KeraSolv
(DVM) is a keratolytic, humectant gel for hyperkeratotic conditions such as nasal hyperkeratosis.

Topical Active Agents

ASTRINGENTS
Astringents precipitate proteins and generally do not penetrate deeply. These agents are
drying and decrease exudations. They are indicated in acute, subacute, and some chronic
exudative dermatoses.

Dermatologic Therapy • 227
Vegetable astringents include tannins from oak trees, sumac, or blackberries. They are
especially recommended for more potent action. Tan Sal (Tanni-Gel, Vet-A-Mix-4%
tannic acid, 4% salicylic acid, and 1% benzocaine in 70% alcohol) is a potent astringent
and should not be used more than once on the same lesion (it may cause irritation or
sloughing). Witch hazel (hamamelis) contains tannins that are astringent and anti-inflammatory and that decrease bleeding.
Aluminum acetate solution (Burow's solution) is available commercially as Domeboro
(Bayer). It is drying, astringent, antipruritic, acidifying, and mildly antiseptic. The solution
is usually diluted 1:40 in cool water, and soaks are repeated three times daily for 30
minutes. (One packet of powder, or one tablet, is added to 0.5 L [1 pt] or 1 L [1 qt] of
water.) It is tolerated better than tannins and does not stain. It tends to be used more
frequently than other astringents.
Acetic acid in a 0.25% to 0.5% solution (e.g., 1 part vinegar with 9 parts water) is also
an effective astringent, acidifying, and drying agent.
Silver nitrate 0.25% solution may be applied to moist, weeping, denuded areas as an
antiseptic, coagulant, and stimulating agent. It should be used frequently and sparingly. It
stains the skin.
Potassium permanganate1:1000 to 1:30,000 solution (I-grain tablet or 5 ml [1 tsp] to
15 ml [1 tbsp] of crystals per 1 L [1 qt] of water) may be applied in fresh preparations for
soaks or irrigations. It is astringent, antiseptic, and antimicrobial and toughens and stains
the skin.

EMOLLIENTS AND MOISTURIZERS
Emollients are agents that soften, lubricate, or soothe the skin; moisturizers increase the
water content of the stratum corneum. Both types of drugs are useful in hydrating and
softening the skin. Demulcents are high-molecular substances in aqueous solution that
coat and protect the skin (e.g., glycerin, propylene glycol).
Many of the occlusive emollients are actually oils (safflower, sesame, and mineral oil)
or contain lanolin. These emollients decrease transepidermal water loss and cause moisturization. These agents work best if applied immediately after saturation of the stratum
corneum with water. For maximal softening, the skin should be hydrated in wet dressings,
dried, and covered with an occlusive hydrophobic oil. The barrier to water loss can be
further strengthened by covering the local lesion with plastic wrap under a bandage.
Nonocclusive emollients are relatively ineffective in retaining moisture.
1. Vegetable oils-olive, cottonseed, com, and peanut oil
2. Animal oils-lard, whale oil, anhydrous lanolin (wool fat), and lanolin with 25% to
30% water (hydrous wool fat)
3. Hydrocarbons-paraffin and petrolatum (mineral oil)
4. Waxes-white wax (bleached beeswax), yellow wax (beeswax), and spermaceti

Hygroscopic agents (humectants) are moisturizers that work by being incorporated
into the stratum corneum and attracting water. These agents, such as propylene glycol,
glycerin, colloidal oatmeal, urea, sodium lactate, carboxylic acid, and lactic acid, may also
be applied between baths. Both occlusive and hygroscopic agents are found in a variety of
veterinary spray and rinse formulations, which are more effective than shampoo bases. A
liposome-based humectant technology (Hydra-Pearls cream rinse, Evsco) was shown to be
superior to a traditional humectant emollient (Humilac, Virbac) for the treatment of dry
skin in dogs. 169

ANTISEBORRHEICS
The seborrheic complex comprises important and somewhat common skin diseases, such
as primary seborrhea (in Cocker and Springer spaniels, Irish setters, and Doberman
pinschers), secondary seborrhea (accompanying atopy, scabies, and demodicosis), Schnauzer comedo syndrome, and tail gland hyperplasia." Topical antiseborrheic therapy is the

228 • Dennatologic Therapy
primary mode of treatment for these diseases. Other primary scaling disorders such as
sebaceous adenitis, vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, and some follicular dysplasias may
benefit from adjunctive therapy with antiseborrheics, which speed the response to the
primary treatment.
Antiseborrheics can be applied as ointments, creams, gels, and lotions, but the most
popular form for hairy skin is the antiseborrheic shampoo or the humectant rinse. Antiseborrheics are commercially available in various combinations. The clinician must decide
which combination of drugs to use and needs to know each drug's actions and concentrations. Ideal therapeutic response depends on the correct choice, but individual patient
variation does occur. For dry and scaly seborrhea (seborrhea sicca), a different preparation
is needed than for oily and greasy seborrhea (seborrhea oleosa). Emollients, for instance,
are useful in dry seborrhea but are not good degreasers. Benzoyl peroxide, on the other
hand, degreases well but can be too keratolytic and drying for dry, brittle skin (see Chap.
14 for details).

ANTIPRURITICS
Antipruritic agents attempt to provide temporary relief from itching but are not usually
satisfactory as sole therapy because of their short duration of effect. Pruritus is a symptom
of many diseases, and most antipruritic topical therapies are directed at the sensation, not
the cause. As such, they are still useful symptomatic treatments while waiting to alleviate
the primary disease or when the cause cannot be determined. As adjunctive therapy or for
small localized areas of pruritus, they can be more beneficial. Some antipruritic agents
listed here have other actions and are discussed elsewhere in this chapter. Table 3-3 lists
some veterinary nonsteroidal, topical, antipruritic agents. In general, antipruritics give
relief from itching by means of six methods:
1. Decreasing the pruritic load by depleting, removing, or inactivating pruritic media-

tors. For example, astringents denature proteins and high-potency corticosteroids
deplete cutaneous mast cells. Shampoos or cleaners can also remove surface irritants, bacteria, pruritogenic substances, and allergens that are on the surface of the
skin waiting to be absorbed and to contribute to the pruritic load.
2. Substituting some other sensation, such as heat and cold, for the itch. This may
also help by raising the pruritic threshold. Heat initially lowers the pruritic threshold, but if the heat is high enough and is applied for a sufficient duration, the
increased itching or burning sensation abates and induces a short-term antipruritic
effect. Cooling tends to decrease pruritus. Examples of such agents are menthol
0.12% to 1%, camphor 0.12% to 5%, thymol 0.5% to 1%, heat (warm soaks or
baths), and cold (ice packs) or cool wet dressings.
3. Protecting the skin from external influences such as scratching, biting, trauma,
temperature changes, humidity changes, pressure, and irritants. This can be done
with bandages or any impermeable protective agents.
4. Anesthetizing the peripheral nerves by using local anesthetics such as pramoxine,
benzocaine, tetracaine, lidocaine, benzoyl peroxide, and tars. These products generally have short actions, and in cases of chronic pruritus, resistance often occurs.
Pramoxine has antipruritic effects that appear to be from a mechanism other than
its anesthetic effect. 219 Pramoxine has also been added to hydrocortisone for additive antipruritic effects in people and in veterinary medicine is available with
colloidal oatmeal (Relief shampoo and creme rinse, DVM; Dermal Soothe shampoo and cream rinse, EVSCO; Resiprox leave on lotion, Virbac).
5. Raising the pruritic threshold by cooling or moisturizing the skin. Dry skin lowers
the pruritic threshold, and the effective use of emollients and moisturizing agents,
such as fatty acids, glycerin, urea, and colloidal oatmeal, partially alleviates pruritus
by reducing the dry skin.
6. Using specific biochemical agents, such as topical glucocorticoids, antihistamines,
and moisturizers.

Dennatologic Therapy • 229
• Table 3-3

USEFUL NONSTEROIDAL TOPICAL AGENTS FOR
PRURITIC DOGS AND CATS

PRODUCT

Spot Application
Caladryl
Dermacool
Domeboro
Histacalm
Ice
PTD Lotion

Relief, Dermal Soothe,
Resiprox
Total Body Application
Allergroom
Hy-Lyt°efa
Epi-Soothe
Histacalm
Hydra-Pearls cream rinse
Hy-Lyt°efa
Water
Aveeno
Epi-Soothe
Relief, Dermal Soothe,
Resiprox

ACTIVE INGREDIENTS
OR ACTION

1% diphenhydramine
hydrochloride, 8%
calamine, camphor
Hamamelis extract,
menthol
Aluminum sulfate, calcium acetate
2% diphenhydramine
Water-cold
2% benzoyl alcohol,
0.05% benzalkonium
chloride, Hamamelis
distillate
1% pramoxine

Moisturizing, hypoallergenic
Moisturizing, hypoallergenic
Colloidal oatmeal
2% diphenhydramine
Humectant, hypoallergenic
Moisturizing, hypoallergenic
Water
Colloidal oatmeal
Colloidal oatmeal
1% pramoxine

FORM

MANUFACTURER

Lotion

Parke-Davis

Spray

Virbac

Soak

Miles

Spray
Pack
Lotion

Virbac
Nature!
Veterinary Prescription

Spray, lotion

DVM, EVSCO, Virbac

Shampoo

Virbac

Shampoo

DVM

Shampoo
Shampoo
Rinse

Virbac
Virbac
EVSCO

Rinse

DVM

Soak
Soak
Soak
Shampoo, rinse

Nature!
Rydelle
Virbac
DVM, EVSCO, Virbac

Most potent glucocorticoids, administered systemically and topically, are helpful because of their anti-inflammatory effect, but they are not without risk (see p. 232).182
Hydrocortisone 0.5% to 2% is safest for topical use and could be considered an antipruritic agent because it has mild anti-inflammatory effects at these concentrations. The fluorinated corticosteroids are more potent and penetrate better but with greater risk of
systemic absorption and both local or systemic adverse effects. Antihistamines administered systemically are occasionally useful, but when applied topically, they have even less
efficacy. They may be helpful as a component of a combination product, such as 1%
diphenhydramine with calamine and camphor (Caladryl, Parke-Davis). Some topical antihistamines were shown to cross the stratum corneum and may exert their antihistaminic
effect after topical application. 12. 77
Topical anesthetics may be partially effective, but they may be toxic (causing methemoglobinemia) or have sensitizing potentials (phenol 0.5%; tetracaine and lidocaine
0.5%).40, 216 Also, their duration of effect is short and becomes even less when used
frequently and repetitively. Veterinary products with these types of agents are Histacalm
shampoo, Resihist leave on lotion, and Histacalm spray (Virbac-2% diphenhydramine);
1% pramoxine shampoos, sprays, rinses, and leave on lotions (DVM, EVSCO, and Virbac),
Dermal Soothe shampoo and cream rinse (EVSCO-l % pramoxine), and Dermacool
(Virbac-hamamelis extract and menthol).
Cool wet dressings are often helpful, and in general, any volatile agent provides a
cooling sensation that might be palliative. This is the basis for using menthol (l %), thymol
(1 %), and alcohol (70%) in antipruritic medications. In addition, menthol has a specific

230 • Dennatologic Therapy
action on local sensory nerve endings. Cool water baths alone or accompanied by Burow's
solution (aluminum acetate) soaks (Domeboro, Bayer) or colloidal oatmeal (Aveeno, Rydelle; Epi-Soothe, Virbac) may be helpful for hours to days.
Pramoxine is a local anesthetic that is chemically different from traditional "caines"
(benzocaine, lidocaine, procainej.F" It has low sensitization and irritation potentials, and
does not produce the methemoglobinemia and the severe side effects that can be noted
with the misuse of "caines" in dogs and cats. 40 , 216 Pramoxine was shown to be useful in
the management of pruritus in dogs with atopic conditions.P'"

ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
No group of drugs is employed more widely than antimicrobial agents. Anytime the skin is
abnormal, the potential develops for secondary microbial infections or overgrowth. These
agents are therefore often used as prophylaxes even when pyoderma is not present. The
terminology used to describe the actions of drugs on microbes is somewhat confusing
because of discrepancies between strict definitions of terms and their general usage.
Antiseptics are substances that kill or prevent growth of microbes (the term is used
especially for preparations applied to living tissue). Disinfectants are agents that prevent
infection by destruction of microbes (the term is used especially for substances applied to
inanimate objects). Antiseptics and disinfectants are types of germicides, which are agents
that destroy microbes. Germicides may be further defined by the appropriate use of terms
such as bactericide, fungicide, and virucide.
In a discussion of such heterogeneous compounds as antimicrobials, some method of
classification is desirable. Because the compounds are so varied with respect to chemical
structure, mechanism of action, and use, too strict a classification may be more confusing
than elucidating. The following discussion is a compromise.
The antiseptic agents are listed with brief comments so that their purposes can be
appreciated when they are recognized as ingredients in proprietary formulations. The use
of some of these agents is described elsewhere in the text (see Chaps. 4 and 5).
• Alcohols. These act by precipitating proteins and dehydrating protoplasm. They are
bactericidal (not sporicidal), astringent, cooling, and rubefacient. However, they are irritating to denuded surfaces and are generally contraindicated in acute inflammatory disorders.
Seventy percent ethyl alcohol and 70% to 90% isopropyl alcohol are the most effective
concentrations and are bactericidal within 1 to 2 minutes at 30°C.
• Propylene Glycol. This is a fairly active antibacterial and antifungal agent. A 40%
to 50% concentration is best. It and polyethylene glycol are primarily used at concentrations of less than 50% as vehicles for other powerful antimicrobial agents. In dilute
solution, propylene glycol has few humectant properties because it is hygroscopic. In a
60% to 75% solution, it denatures and solubilizes protein and is keratolytic.
• Phenols and Cresols, Agents such as hexachlorophene, resorcinol, hexylresorcinol,
thymol, and picric acid act by denaturing microbial proteins. They are also antipruritic and
somewhat antifungal. They may be added at low levels as preservatives in some products.
At higher antimicrobial levels, they are irritating, toxic (hexachlorophenej.l'" and currently
have few legitimate uses on the skin. Phenols and cresols are contraindicated in cats.
• Chlorhexidine. Chlorhexidine is a phenol-related biguanide antiseptic and disinfectant that has excellent properties: It is highly effective against many fungi, viruses, and
most bacteria, except perhaps some Pseudorrwnas and Serratia strains." It appears that a
2% to 4% concentration of chlorhexidine is needed for a good anti-Malassezia effect. It is
nonirritating, rarely sensitizing, not inactivated by organic matter, and persistent in action;
furthermore, it is effective in shampoo, ointment, surgical scrub, and solution formulations
containing 1% to 4% concentrations of chlorhexidine diacetate or gluconate. A 0.05%
dilution in water is an effective, nonirritating solution for wound irrigation. This agent is
safe for cats.

• Halogenated Agents
Iodine. This is one of the oldest antimicrobials. Elemental iodine is the active agent
(its mechanism is unknown). It is rapidly bactericidal, fungicidal, virucidal, and sporicidal.

Dennatologic Therapy • 23 I

Older products such as tincture of iodine (2% iodine and 2% sodium iodide in alcohol)
and Lugol's iodine solution (5% to 7% iodine and 10% potassium iodide in water) are
irritating and sensitizing, especially in cats, and should no longer be used.
Currently, the only commonly used iodines are the "tamed" iodines (iodophors)
because of their lower level of irritation or sensitization. Povidone-iodine (Betadine, Purdue-Frederick)-iodine with polyvinylpyrrolidone, which slowly releases iodine to tissues-has a prolonged action (4 to 6 hours), is nonstinging and nonstaining, and is not
impaired by blood, serum, necrotic debris, or pus. A study using a povidone-iodine
shampoo showed efficacy, although less than that of benzoyl peroxide as a prophylactic
agent against Staphylococcus iniermediusi? Polyhydroxydine (Xenodine, VPL) at 1% is
reportedly superior in efficacy to povidone-iodine solutions or tincture of iodine against
gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Even tamed iodines can be drying to the skin,
staining to light-colored haircoats, and especially irritating to scrotal skin and the external
ear.
Sodium Hypochlorite and Chloramines. These are effective bactericidal, fungicidal, sporicidal, and virucidal agents. Their action is thought to be due to liberation of
hypochlorous acid. Fresh preparations are needed. Sodium hypochlorite 5.25% (Clorox,
Clorox) diluted 1:10 with water (modified Dakin's solution) is usually well tolerated. The
presence of organic material greatly reduces the solution's antimicrobial activity. It is most
often recommended as an antifungal agent or disinfectant. It can be irritating to cats .
• Oxidizing Agents. Hydrogen peroxide is a weak germicide that acts through the
liberation of nascent oxygen (e.g., 3% hydrogen peroxide used in dilute water solution). It
has limited usefulness for skin disease, although it is used as an ear-flushing agent and for
cleaning minor skin wounds, partly for its effervescent activity.
Potassium permanganate acts as a bactericidal, astringent, and fungicidal agent (especially against Candida spp.). Its action is thought to involve liberation of nascent oxygen.
This agent stings and stains, and it is inhibited by organic material. The staining is
particularly a problem.
Benzoyl peroxide is a potent, broad-spectrum antibacterial agent that has keratolytic,
keratoplastic, antipruritic, degreasing, and follicular flushing action. 85 . 157, 168 It is a potent
oxidizing agent that reacts with biological materials. The resultant benzoyl peroxy radicals
interact with hydroxy and sulfoxy groups, double bonds, and other substances. This allows
the benzoyl peroxide to disrupt microbial cell membranes. Benzoyl peroxide is metabolized in the skin to benzoic acid, which lyses intercellular substance in the stratum
corneum to account for its keratolytic effect. It is irritating in 10% of the dogs and 25% of
the cats treated.
Benzoyl peroxide is available as a 5% gel and a 2.5% or 3% shampoo (OxyDex, DVM;
SulfOxydex, DVM; Pyoben, Virbac; Benzoyl-Plus, EVSCO), which is an excellent adjunct
to antibiotic therapy for superficial and deep bacterial pyodermias. In a shampoo formulation, it was superior to chlorhexidine, complexed iodine, and triclosan for prophylaxis
against S. intermediusi" It is often recommended in seborrheic disorders, particularly
cases that are greasy or have follicular plugs, follicular casts, or comedones.
One should not use generic or more concentrated formulations (e.g., 5% shampoo or
10% gel) on animals because stability may be compromised and the higher concentrations
are more often irritating. Even at 2.5% or 3% concentrations, it is drying and occasionally
irritating, especially in dogs with dry skin ancl!or allergic skin disease. Repackaging should
be avoided because improper packaging may affect stability of the product. A commercial
benzoyl peroxide shampoo containing liposome-based humectant technology (Benzoyl-Plus
benzoyl peroxide shampoo, EVSCO) can be used even on dogs with dry skin without
exacerbating the dryness.s'" Controlled release of benzoyl peroxide from a microsphere
system reduces topical irritation in humans.F"
Other side effects of 2.5% to 3% benzoyl peroxide include bleaching of hair and
clothing. It has skin tumor-promoting activity in laboratory rodents, but no skin tumorinitiating activity has been documented in any other species.l'"
• Surface-Acting Agents. These agents in the form of emulsifiers, wetting agents,

232 • Dennatologic Therapy
or detergents act by altering energy relationships at interfaces, thus disrupting or damaging cell membranes. They also denature proteins and inactivate enzymes. The most
commonly used examples are the cationic detergents (quaternary ammonium compounds),
especially benzalkonium chloride. Benzalkonium chloride is a broad-spectrum antibacterial
agent (not effective against Pseudomonas spp.). However, anionic soaps inactivate it, and it
is toxic to cats, producing skin and muscle necrosis. 158
Silver salts precipitate proteins and interfere with bacterial metabolic activities. They
are antibacterial and astringent but irritating, staining, stinging, and escharotic (e.g., silver
nitrate 0.5%). Silver sulfadiazine is useful to treat superficial bums. At 1% concentration,
it was effective and superior to sodium hypochlorite for the treatment of experimentally
induced Pseudomonas spp. otitis extema.l'" It has also been shown to be effective in vitro
at 0.1%, allowing for the dilution of the thick cream to a much more liquid lotion.P?
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS
Cold dressings are among the simplest and safest agents that reduce inflammation. However, topical glucocorticoid preparations are used most commonly and effectively to reduce inflammation. There is little evidence to suggest that they have caused dissemination
of cutaneous infections, but if they are used in the presence of known infections, specific
antibacterial or antifungal agents should be added to the preparation. The basic hydrocortisone molecule or synthetic analogs thereof are modified by halogenation, methylation,
acetylation, esterification, and/or double-bond induction in an effort to enhance the therapeutic effect and reduce side effects. Generic products may not always be equivalent to
proprietary products (Table 3_4).44
In high concentration, in abraded and inflamed skin, or under occlusive dressings,
these corticosteroids are absorbed. They rarely produce serious untoward clinical effects if
used in the short term. Moriello and colleagues.P" however, found that short-term (7-day)
application of topical otic products (Panalog, Fort Dodge; Tresaderm, Merial) can adversely affect the adrenocortical response to exogenous corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic
hormone [ACTH]). Marked adrenocortical suppression was still present 14 days after
therapy was discontinued. These products also produced elevations in routinely monitored
liver enzyme test results (e.g., serum alkaline phosphatase and leucine aminotransferase
activity).
Similarly, Zenoble and Kemppainenv" reported that the daily application of triamcinolone, fluocinonide, or betamethasone to the skin of normal dogs for 5 days produced
suppression of adrenocortical responses to ACTH, which persisted for 3 to 4 weeks after
the last application. Verheijen and coworkers showed that topical betamethasone-17-valerate and resocortol butyrate were absorbed and suppressed adrenal response to corticotrophin-releasing factor.P? However, the onset, degree of suppression, and duration was
greater with the betamethasone-17-valerate.
When a 1% hydrocortisone leave-on conditioner was applied twice weekly for 6 weeks
to normal dogs, no changes in hematologic, biochemical, or cortisol response to exogenous
ACTH occurred.P? However, in dogs with pruritic skin disease, suppression of cortisol
responses to ACTH was determined, suggesting a greater absorption of the product
through inflamed skin. Finally, Glaze and colleagues'" reported that daily application of
ophthalmic preparations containing glucocorticoids also suppressed adrenocortical responses to ACTH and produced elevations in hepatic enzyme activity in normal dogs. It
may be concluded that topical glucocorticoids should not be considered innocuous drugs
(Table 3_5).160
Local effects, including atrophy, scaling, comedones, alopecia, and pyoderma, may
occur even without systemic effects. A subepidermal bullous dermatosis has been reported
from the topical application of triamcinolone acetonide, fluocinolone acetonide, and betamethasone valerate." They maintain a "reservoir" pool in the skin, enough that a oncedaily application may suffice to continue the topical effect. Topical glucocorticoid therapy
should follow principles similar to those used for systemic therapy. That is, potent drugs
should be administered twice daily to stop inflammation, then tapered to once daily;

Dennatologic Therapy > 233
• Table 3-4

RELATIVE ANTI·INFLAMMATORY POTENCIES OF
SELECTED TOPICAL GLUCOCORTICOIDS*

AGENT
Group I
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.5% cream, ointment
Clobetasol propionate, 0.05% cream, ointment
Diflorasone diacetate, 0.5% ointment
Group II
Betamethasone dipropionate, 0.5% ointment
Desoximetasone, 0.25% cream, ointment
Fluocinonide, 0.05% cream, ointment
Group 11/
Betamethasone valerate, 0.1 % ointment
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.5% cream
Group IV
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.025 ointment
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.01 solution
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.1 % cream
Group V
Betamethasone valerate, 0.1% cream, lotion
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.025% cream
Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.1 % cream, lotion
Group VI
Desonide, 0.05% cream
Fluocinolone acetonide, 0.01% shampoo
Group VII
Dexamethasone, 0.1 % cream
Dexamethasone, 0.04% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1 and 2.5% cream, ointment
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1% spray
Hydrocortisone, 1% shampoo
Hydrocortisone, 1% leave on lotion

BRAND NAME

MANUFACTURER

Diprolene
Temovate
Psorcon

Schering-Plough
Claxo Derm
Dermik

Diprosone
Topicort
Lidex

Schering-Plough
Hoechst-Roussel
Dermik

Valisone
Kenalog

Schering-Plough
Westwood-Squibb

Synalar
Synotic]
Vetalogf

Syntex
Fort Dodge
Fort Dodge

Valisone
Synalar
Kenalog

Schering-Plough
Syntex
Westwood-Squibb

Tridesilon
FS shampoo

Miles
Hill

Decaderm
Decaspray
Hytone
Cortisprayf
Dermacool-HC f
Hydro-Plus]

MSD
MSD
Dermik
DVM
Virbac
Phoenix
Butler
VRx
Virbac
Virbac

Hydro-LO mist]

PTD-HCf
Cortisoothef
Resicortf

"Croup I is most potent: Group VII is least potent.
tVeterinary label.

finally, if the drugs are still effective and long-term treatment is expected, the treatment is
changed to less potent topical agents for maintenance therapy, and alternate-day administration is used whenever possible. Twice-weekly applications may suffice in some cases.
People handling these medications should wear gloves to prevent exposure and toxic
effects.
The fluorinated steroids are more potent, penetrate better, and thus are more effective. Table 3-4 lists therapeutic concentrations of several topical glucocorticoids and
provides brand name examples.
MISCELLANEOUS TOPICAL AGENTS

• Sulfur. Medicinal use of sulfur is as old as Hippocrates." Lime sulfur (sulfurated
lime) is prepared by bailing a suspension of sublimated sulfur, lime (Ca [OH]2), and
water, thus producing calcium pentasulfide and calcium thiosulfate. Sulfur is a degreasing
agent. At low concentrations, sulfur is keratoplastic, whereas higher concentrations are
keratolytic (H 2S breaks down keratin). It is synergistic in this respect with salicylic acid.
Sulfur is antifungal and antibacterial, presumably by conversion to pentathionic acid and
H 2S (this conversion can be accomplished by cutaneous bacteria and by keratinocytes).
Lime sulfur was more effective than chlorhexidine, captan, povidone iodine, and

234 • Dermatologic Therapy
• Table 3-5

EFFECTS OF GLUCOCORTICOIDS ON
ADRENOCORTICAL FUNCTION IN DOGS

DRUG

Parenteral Administration
Dexamethasone
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate
Dexamethasone alcohol
Dexamethasone 21-isonicotinate
Dexamethasone 21-isonicotinate
Methylprednisolone acetate
Methylprednisolone acetate
Methylprednisolone acetate
Triamcinolone acetonide
Triamcinolone acetonide
Topical Administration
Betamethasone valerate
Dexamethasone
Dexamethasone
Fluocinonide
Prednisolone acetate
Triamcinolone acetonide
Triamcinolone acetate

PROTOCOL

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

0.2 mglkg once
0.1 mglkg once
1 mglkg once
0.1 mglkg once
1 mglkg once
2.5 mglkg once
4 mglkg once
0.56 mglkg once
0.22 mglkg once
0.22 mglkgJday for 8 days

IV
IV
1M
1M
1M
1M
1M

1.36 mglkgJday for 5 days
0.03 mglkgJday for 8 wk
0.31 mglkgJday for 3 wk
0.68 mglkgJday for 5 days
0.75 mglkgJday for 4 wk
1.36 mglkgJday for 5 days
0.31 mglkgJday for 3 wk

Skin ointment
Ophthalmic drops
Otic drops
Skin ointment
Ophthalmic drops
Skin ointment
Otic drops

SC
1M
PO

DURATION OF
SUPPRESSION
AFTER TREATMENT
STOPPED

32 hr
<24 hr
48 hr
10 days
4wk
5 wk
9wk
3 wk
4wk
2wk
4wk
2wk
3wk
4wk
2 wk
4 wk
3 wk

IV = intravenously; 1M = intramuscularly; SC = subcutaneously; PO = orally.
From Scott DW: Rational use of glucocorticoids in dermatology. In; Bonagura JD, Kirk RW (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XII, 1995, p. 578.

ketoconazole shampoo in inhibiting Microsporum canis growth from infected cat hairs. 215
Its parasiticidal activity is thought to be due to H 2S and polythionic acid. Lime sulfur is
inexpensive and nontoxic (Lym Dyp, DVM), Side effects include occasional excessive
drying and/or irritation of the skin. Cosmetic drawbacks include a disagreeable odor
(rotten eggs), temporary yellow staining of light haircoats and skins, staining of clothing
and other materials, and tarnishing of jewelry.
• Vitamin A Acid. A 0.05% concentration of retinoic acid (tretinoin [Retin-A,
Roche]) is popular in human dermatology (used for treating acne, decreasing wrinkles,
and treating ichthyosis). It is relatively expensive but has been used in dogs and cats for
acne and some localized keratinization disorders. so
The effectiveness of topical tretinoin for the treatment of the effects of photoaging is
well documented. The gel form at 0.01 % concentration is initially used because it is less
irritating than the 0.025% concentration. It increases the epidermal turnover time, reduces
the cohesiveness of keratinocytes, normalizes maturation of follicular epithelium, and is
comedolytic.F" In animal models it prevents corticosteroid-induced skin atrophy.l'" Local
irritation is a significant problem for many people and cats (e.g., with Retin-A). A microsphere formulation (Retin-A-MICRO) is now available that irritates much less in humans.
Synthetic retinoids are also becoming available as topical formulations. Adapalene
(Differin, Galderma) is a new topical retinoid with specific receptor activity for intranuclear retinoic acid receptors and causes less irritation than retinoic acid. It also inhibits
neutrophil activation and lipoxygenase enzymes. 175, 204 Tazarotene (Tazorac, Allergan) is a
new topical formulation. It is a novel acetylenic retinoid that is being evaluated as a 0.1%
and 0.05% gel formulation.i" As a topical therapy it appears to have minimal systemic
absorption, with no adverse systemic signs yet reported.
Tazarotene acts on retinoic acid receptors and results in downregulation of keratinocyte proliferation, differentiation, and inflammation.v- 107 It does this by a combination of
effects, including the induction and activation of new genes, downregulation of API (a
proinflammatory genetic factor), and antagonizing the effects of interferon-yo It has been
shown to be effective for acne and psoriasis while having no adverse systemic reactions.

Dermatologic Therapy • 235

• Urea. Urea has hygroscopic and keratolytic actions that aid in normalizing the
epidermis, especially the quality of the stratum corneum.F'" The application of urea in a
cream or an ointment base has a softening and moisturizing effect on the stratum
corneum and makes the vehicle feel less greasy. It acts as a humectant in concentrations
of 2% to 20%; however, in concentrations above that level, it is keratolytic. That action is
a result of the solubilization of prekeratin and keratin and the possible breakage of
hydrogen bonds that keep the stratum corneum intact. It also promotes desquamation by
dissolving the "intercellular substance."
A hypoallergenic, moisturizing shampoo (Allergroom, Virbac) contains 5% urea free
and in spherulites. Humilac (Virbac) contains both urea and lactic acid, and it can be used
as a spray or rinse. To make a rinse, 5 capfuls of Humilac are added to 1 L (1 qt) of
water. The mixture is rinsed over the dog's coat and allowed to dry. KeraSolv (DVM)
contains 6% salicylic acid, 5% urea, and 5% sodium lactate. It is a potent keratolytic used
to treat nasal hyperkeratosis, calluses, ear-margin dermatosis, and acne."
• a-Hydroxyacids 2% to 10%. These include lactic, malic, citric, pyruvic, glutamic,
glycolic, and tartaric acids. They are effective in modulating keratinization, being keratoplastic, and being able to delay terminal differentiation and to reduce the intercellular
cohesion forces of the stratum corneum. Lactic acid and sodium lactate can absorb up to
30 times their weight in water.v"
• Fatty Acids. These acids are keratolytic and fungistatic. Examples are caprylic,
propionic, and undecylenic acids. The best of these (although it is weak) is undecylenic
acid (e.g., Desenex). Topical fatty acids are also used to treat essential fatty-acid deficiency. Topical sunflower oil, which is high in linoleic acid, decreased transepidermal
water loss in seborrheic dogs.26
• Propylene Glycol. This agent is primarily used as a solvent and a vehicle. 58 , 86 At
higher concentrations (>75%), it occasionally causes irritation or sensitization. It is an
excellent lipid solvent and de fats the skin; however, its chief value is probably the ability
to enhance percutaneous penetration of drugs, Propylene glycol is also a potent and
reliable antibacterial agent and has antidermatophyte and anticandidal properties. For
most dermatologic cases, it can be used in concentrations of 30% to 40%. Propylene
glycol is a superior humectant (hygroscopic) and can induce keratolysis. Thus, higher
concentrations are particularly helpful in hyperkeratotic conditions, and 75% propylene
glycol spray is effective in managing sebaceous adenitis (see Chap. 18).
• Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO). DMSO is a simple, hygroscopic, organic solvent.P
Because it is freely miscible with lipids, organic solvents, and water, it is an excellent
vehicle. When exposed to the air, concentrated solutions take in water to become hydrated at 67%. Stronger concentrations tend to cross the skin barrier better. DMSO
penetrates skin (within 5 minutes), mucous membranes, and the blood-brain barrier, as
well as cell, organelle, and microbial membranes. Unlike most solvents, DMSO achieves
penetration without membrane damage. It facilitates absorption of many other substances
across membranes, especially corticosteroids. On a cellular level, DMSO and steroids exert
a synergistic effect.
DMSO has properties of its own as a cryoprotective, radioprotective, anti-ischemic,
anti-inflammatory (free-radical scavenger, decreases prostaglandin synthesis, stabilizes lysosomal membranes), and analgesic (blocks C fibers) agent. It also has variable antibacterial,
antifungal, and antiviral properties, depending on the concentration (usually 5% to 50%)
and the organism involved. It decreases fibroplasia,
Although its mechanism of action is incompletely understood, the systemic toxicity
and teratogenicity of this solvent in its pure form are considered low. Toxicity may be of
concern, depending on the dose, the route of administration, the species, and the individual animal's reaction. Impurities or combinations with other agents may make DMSO
dangerous as a result of its ability to enhance transepidermal absorption, Industrial forms
of DMSO should never be used for medical purposes because the contained impurities
are absorbed and may be toxic. Well-known minor side effects include a garlic-like odor,
increased warmth and/or pruritus (histamine release, exothermic with water), and dehydration (too hygroscopic).

236 • Dennatologic Therapy
Potential uses might include topical application to cutaneous ulcers, bums, insect
bites, interdigital granulomas, open wounds, and skin grafts; reduction of exuberant granulation tissue; and treatment of acral lick dermatitis. One formula shown to be safe and
useful contains Burow's solution, hydrocortisone, and 90% DMSO.172 Equal parts of 90%
DMSO and Hydro-B 1020 (1% hydrocortisone and 2% Burow's solution in a water and
propylene glycol base) are mixed. The formulation is applied daily to benefit patients with
pyotraumatic dermatitis and acral lick dermatitis. Application of the 90% gel can hasten
the resolution of calcinosis cutis (see Chap. 10).
• Aloe Vera. Much of the information on aloe vera is anecdotal. 7. 174 There are over
300 species of Aloe plants, and they differ in chemical composition with the species,
climate, and growing conditions. The terms aloe, aloe vera, aloin, and aloe extract refer to
the end products of different methods of extracting juice from Aloe plants. The result of
this non uniformity of collection or extraction is a wide difference between the contents,
consistency, and appearance of different products. Likewise, interpreting and comparing
various studies is often impossible.
Aloe vera contains a large number of organic compounds and inorganic elements:
anthraquinones (e.g., anthracene, emodin), saccharides (e.g., glucose, cellulose, mannose),
enzymes (e.g., oxidase, lipase), vitamins (e.g., niacinamide, C, E, A), amino acids, and
minerals (e.g., copper, zinc). Anti-inflammatory properties include salicylic acid, bradykininase activity (reduction of pain, swelling, and erythema), magnesium lactate (reduction of
histamine production), antiprostaglandin activity, and protease inhibitor activity. In vitro
studies indicate that aloe vera inhibits the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
Anecdotal reports indicate that aloe vera is useful for the treatment of pain, pruritus,
fungal infections, bacterial infections, insect bites, bums, and exuberant granulation tissue." 126, 174
• Acetic Acid. Acetic acid is a potent antibacterial agent: A 5% solution (e.g.,
vinegar) kills coagulase-positive staphylococci in 5 minutes, and a 2.5% solution (e.g., one
part vinegar, one part water) kills P. aeruginosa in 1 minute (see Chap. 19). A 2.5%
solution kills Malassezia pachydemw.tis (see Chap. 5). Acetic acid may also be used in ears
(0.25% to 0.5% solution) as a ceruminolytic, astringent, and acidifier (see Chap. 19).
• Melaleuca Oil. Melaleuca oil ("tea tree oil") is extracted from the leaves of the
"tea tree" (genus Melaleuca).2oo It has proven antibacterial (e.g., coagulase-positive staphylococci) and fungicidal (e.g., Candida albicans, T. mentagrophytes) properties. Melaleuca
oil is marketed for use on dogs, cats, and ferrets in skin care products for cleaning,
healing, and relieving pruritus. Claims are also made that it is a deodorizer, detangler, and
external parasite repellent. The inappropriate or excessive application of melaleuca oil to
the skin may result in toxicosis: hypersalivation, incoordination, weakness, hypothermia,
and hepatic injury.
• Colloidal Oatmeal. Colloidal oatmeal is useful in the management of dry skin and
pruritus by virtue of its demulcent, humectant, and antipruritic properties. It is incorporated into a number of veterinary shampoos. It may also be used as a rinse or soak by
adding 1 to 2 tablespoons (15 to 30 ml) of the powder (Epi-Soothe, Virbac; Aveeno,
Rydelle Laboratories) to 1 gallon (4 L) of water. Colloidal oatmeal can leave a residue in
the haircoat as well as in the bathtub. The bathtub can become slippery.
• Topical Sunscreens. A dense haircoat protects most small animals from excessive
exposure to sunlight. In some dogs, the skin is pigmented, which also protects from
ultraviolet radiation damage. However, whenever nonpigmented, unhaired skin is exposed
to sunlight, solar damage may occur. Predisposed areas include the ear tips in white cats,
the glabrous abdomen in Dalmatians and bull terriers, and hairless areas. Some animals
respond with hyperpigmentation, whereas other animals do not experience hyperpigmentation but may incur sunburn or solar dermatitis.
Protection from the sun can be attained by staying indoors from 10 AM to 4 PM, by
tanning the skin (a process of building up pigmentation and mild acanthosis and hyperkeratosis), and by using topical or oral sunscreens.P" Topical sunscreens may act physically or

Dermatologic Therapy • 237

chemically. In chemical screens, aminobenzoic acid or benzophenone derivatives act to
absorb ultraviolet rays. They are clear, cosmetically acceptable lotions or gels.
Physical sunscreens include chemicals such as zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, which
reflect and scatter light by forming an opaque barrier. These barrier types are available in
many colors (Bullfrog brand), including black, which some owners prefer for use on noses.
They also are water-resistant and are not as easily removed by the pet. These agents are
messy, especially in long haircoats. Topical sunscreens are rated for efficiency by a sun
protective factor (SPF) number. Numbers 2 to 4 are mild blockers, 8 to 10 give moderate
protection, and 15 or higher gives blockage. For use in animals, water-resistant sunscreens
with an SPF of 15 or greater should be used. These numbers are only guides, because the
frequency and thickness of application, temperature, humidity, potency of light exposure,
patient's sensitivity, and many other factors modify results.
Usually, sunscreen needs to be applied three or four times a day for greatest effectiveness. Photodecomposition is a problem, and titanium dioxide or zinc oxide sunscreens
tend to resist this and are preferred if repeat application is not possible.t'" A common
misconception is that if the animal licks the area after application, the sunscreen is
removed. Although this is true for the physical blockers (e.g., zinc oxide), it is a minimal
problem with chemical blockers because these products are absorbed into the skin and
pool within the stratum corneum to produce a reservoir of protection. Chemical blockers
are not effective if no epithelium is present (e.g., on ulcers) .

• PHYSICAL THERAPY
The use of heat, cold, light, and radiation therapy for the treatment of skin disorders is
not new, but advances have made the therapies more specific and more effective. Freezing, heat, electricity, and laser light are presented as surgical techniques at the end of this
chapter.

Photochemotherapy
Photochemotherapy uses light waves to excite or increase the energy of a photosensitive
drug that causes a selective cytotoxic effect on tumors. The initial drug used in veterinary
medicine is a hematoporphyrin derivative porfimer sodium (Photofrin-V, QLT Phototherapeutics).187 The drug has a much greater affinity for tumor tissue than for surrounding
normal cells. A newer-generation photosensitizer is chloroaluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine (Porphyrin products). It is reported to have the advantages of less cutaneous photosensitization and better light absorption for the wavelengths commonly used in this
therapy.l'" Light is effective on only a few layers of surface cells, except red-range lights,
which can penetrate as much as 1 to 2 cm. The light source is a laser system that
produces a red laser beam that passes through low-attenuation fiberoptic tracts. These are
directed through 19-9auge needles into the appropriate areas of tumor. Treatment takes
about 20 minutes, and repeated exposures are no problem. Patients should be kept out of
sunlight for 3 to 4 weeks as they are systemically photosensitized.
Approximately 50% of tumors respond completely, and an additional 30% show partial
responses.P" The most favorable results were obtained in patients with malignant melanoma, fibrosarcoma, mast cell tumor, adamantinoma, and synovial cell sarcoma. Mixed
responses occurred in animals with squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, and hemangiopericytoma.

Hyperthermia
Local current-field radiofrequency is used to produce enough heat in a local superficial
area to cause tissue necrosis. Two groups have used a temperature of 50°C for 30 to 60
seconds to treat feline tumors.P-"? The heat was controlled to affect only the tumor and 2
to 3 mm of surrounding normal tissue, Results were much better with lesions less than 5

238 • Derrnatologic Therapy
mm in diameter by 2 mm deep. In these cases, approximately 70% of the tumors
completely regressed, and an additional 20% partially regressed. With larger tumors, the
results were much poorer. Favorable responses were obtained with squamous cell carcinomas, fibrosarcomas of cats, and circumanal gland tumors of dogs. There were no serious
side effects. This therapy should not be used on the pinna of the ear because it may cause
necrosis and sloughing.
Hyperthermia has also been used for topical treatment of localized dermatophytosis.
By using the same system and producing heat of 50°C for 30 seconds in an area 4 mm
deep by 1 em in diameter, successful results were achieved after only one treatment. For
large lesions, the heat probe was moved sequentially to new areas of 1 em in diameter
until the whole lesion was treated. Fluorescence disappeared within 48 hours, and healing
was complete in 2 to 6 weeks. Hyperthermia was considered the treatment of choice for
localized dermatophytosis. However, this type of therapy necessitates anesthesia, is cumbersome, is impractical with widespread lesions, and has not been corroborated by other
investigators.
Heat is also used in electrosurgical procedures such as fulguration to destroy tissue.

Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy has important benefits in the treatment of skin tumors, carefully selected cases of feline indolent ulcer, and canine acral lick dermatitis. Because not all cells
are equally sensitive to radiation, these rays act selectively. Cells that divide rapidly, such
as carcinoma cells, basal cells of the hair papilla, and vascular endothelial cells, are
damaged more easily than those of the remaining skin. X-ray beams that are filtered
through aluminum or copper sheets to remove soft rays penetrate deeply into the tissues
because of their short wavelengths. Radiation delivered at about 80 kV with little or no
filtration (0.5 mm of aluminum) has longer wavelengths, and its energy is dissipated
superficially.
Before considering radiation therapy for a patient, the clinician must be certain of the

following:
1. The treatment has good potential for benefit and little potential for harm.
2. Safer forms of therapy were not effective or radiation therapy is considered a
therapy of choice. For indolent ulcers and acral lick dermatitis, radiation therapy is
generally a treatment of last resort.
3. Relative cost of this therapy is acceptable.
4. The number and frequency of treatments is acceptable,
5. Proper, safe equipment and facilities are available so that
a. The exact dose can be administered.
b. The patient can be anesthetized or restrained for therapy without exposure of
personnel.
c. Proper shielding of unaffected parts is provided.
6. Adequate records are kept for future reference.

If these points can be accomplished, radiation therapy may be considered. Such cases
should be referred to a radiologist who specializes in radiation therapy.

• BROAD-SPECTRUM SYSTEMIC THERAPIES
Systemic Nonsteroidal Antipruritic or Nonsteroidal
Anti-Inflammatory Agents
In practice, one is often presented with a pruritic or inflammatory dermatosis that is not
microbial or parasitic. In other cases, even though a specific cause (e.g., scabies) is
determined, symptomatic antipruritic or anti-inflammatory therapy may be desired.?" Systemic glucocorticoids are most commonly prescribed. However, although glucocorticoids

Dermatologic Therapy • 239

are highly effective in managing these cases and many hypersensitivity disorders, the
frequent occurrence of side effects of variable severity stimulates continual investigations
for alternative drugs or methods that will allow an avoidance or reduction in the dose of
glucocorticoid. is. 41, ll9, 160, 166, 167
Reasons for electing nonsteroidal agents include (1) unacceptable acute or chronic
glucocorticoid side effects, (2) immunosuppressed patients (e.g., cats with feline leukemia
virus or feline immunodeficiency virus infections), (3) patients with infectious diseases
(viral, fungal, and bacterial), (4) patients with other diseases in which glucocorticoids may
be contraindicated (diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, renal disease, and neoplasia), and (5)
pet owners who do not want to use glucocorticoids in their animals. A variety of unrelated
nonsteroidal drugs may be used.
Scott and Buerger l 63 used a supplement that contained omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids
(DermCaps, DVM), three different antihistamines (chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine,
hydroxyzine), an antibiotic (erythromycin), and aspirin in an open study of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents in the management of 45 cases of canine pruritus. Thirty-two
dogs had atopy or flea-bite hypersensitivity, and 13 dogs had idiopathic nonseasonal
pruritus. As a group, the six drugs controlled itching in 40% of the cases, and there was
improvement in another 15%. However, side effects occurred in 46% of cases, being
severe enough in 33% of the dogs to prompt halting of treatment with one or more of the
drugs, Good to moderate improvement of pruritus was obtained for each medication (see
Table 3-5).
Subsequent studies, several of which were placebo-controlled and double-blind studies, show that options other than systemic glucocorticoids are available. Other agents with
reported anti-inflammatory effect have been tried with limited success on allergic dogs.
The following agents were of no benefit: acetylsalicylic acid,163 doxycycline.P' papaverine,164 vitamin C,121 zinc, llB and the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide.
The majority of work has evaluated three main classes of drugs: antihistamines, fatty
acids, and psychotropic agents. Because antihistamines function primarily in allergic diseases, they are covered in Chapter 8. Psychotropic drugs, which can also be useful in
managing allergic pruritus, are primarily used to treat psychogenic disease and are covered
in Chapter 15.

Fatty Acids
Fatty acids, as previously discussed, are an important part of the normal diet. By controlling the relative levels of omega-6 to omega-3 in the total diet, the development of
inflammatory mediators in neutrophils and other organs may be modified. Two studies
utilizing these omega-6/omega-3 ratios of 5:1 showed similar results, with over 40% of
atopic or allergic pruritic dogs experiencing good results. lSI, 171
The use of supplements for treating pruritic inflammatory diseases and crusting diseases in dogs and cats has been the subject of multiple open and controlled studies. 14, IS,
73-75,100,101,103, 117, 119, 120, 170, 2ll In general, this method has shown success for the management of pruritus and inflammation associated with a variety of diseases, though predominantly allergic,
The proposed mechanism, besides the inhibition of arachidonic acid metabolism,
relates to metabolic byproducts of fatty acid metabolism. Supplements used for pruritus
usually contain one or both of y-linolenic acid and EPA. y-Linolenic acid is found in
relatively high concentrations in evening primrose, borage, and black currant oils, It is
elongated to DGLA, which directly competes with arachidonic acid as a substrate for
cyclooxygenase and 15-lipoxygenase, The result of DGLA metabolism is the formation of
prostaglandin El and 15-hydroxy-8,1l,13-eicosatetraenoic acid, both of which are thought
to have anti-inflammatory effects."!
EPA, which is usually supplied by using cold water marine fish oils, also competes as
a substrate for cyclooxygenase and 5- and 15-lipoxygenase, The metabolism of EPA by the
lipoxygenase enzymes results in the formation of leukotriene B5 and 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid, These two products are thought to inhibit leukotriene B4, which is a potent

240 • Dermatologic Therapy
pro-inflammatory mediator. This mechanism was reviewed by White,211 and Figure 3-2
demonstrates the interactions of y-linolenic acid, EPA, and arachidonic acid.
Consumption of a diet enriched in N-3 (omega-3) fatty acids reduced delayed-type
hypersensitivity responses, decreased production of prostaglandin E2, and resulted in
increased postvaccinal total lymphocyte count in aged Beagle dogs." An omega-3 fatty
acid-enriched diet had no long-term negative effect on wound healing in dogs. 148 •
Another area that still needs investigation is the importance or effect of combining
the fatty acids with other elements such as vitamins and minerals and cofactors. Some
manufacturers and authors'?' have claimed that the right combination of cofactors maximizes the beneficial effects. Controlled studies to determine this and what cofactors are
most important have not yet been presented.
In one double-blind study, a fatty acid product containing cofactors was no more
effective than products that did not contain cofactors.F? Other formulations claim to
improve fatty acid absorption by such techniques as miscillization. Again, controlled studies are needed. How long one should try a product has also not been definitively

FIGURE 3-2. I, N-6 fatty acid metabolism with production of anti-inflammatory eicosanoids. II, Arachidonic acid
cascade with production of proinflammatory eicosanoids. III, N-3 fatty acid metabolism with production of anti-inflammatory eicosanoids. 13-HODE, 13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid; PG, prostaglandin; E, elongase; <i.-6-D, <i.-6-desaturase; LA,
linoleic acid; GLA, y-linolenic acid; EPO, evening primrose oil; DGLA, dihomo-y-linolenic acid; AA, arachidonic acid;
ALA, a-linolenic acid; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; DES, desaturase; PLA2, phospholipase
A2; CO, cyclooxygenase; LO, lipoxygenase; HETE, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid; HPETE, hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic
acid; HEPE, hydroxyeicosapentaenoic acid; 15-HETrE, 15-hydroxy-8,1l,13-eicosatriaenoic acid; LT, leukotriene. * Indicates arachidonic acid-derived eicosanoids identified in inflammatory skin disease; -+ indicates inhibitory or anti-inflammatory eicosanoid (number of slash lines indicates degree of inhibition). (From White P: Essential fatty acids: Use in
management of canine atopy. Camp Cant Educ 15:451, 1993.)

Dennatologic Therapy • 24 I

determined. Although some dogs and cats show a favorable response within I to 2 weeks,
an adequate therapeutic trial might necessitate 9 to 12 weeks.
The risks and side effects of fatty acid supplementation are few. The most serious,
although rarely reported, side effect is pancreatitis." With large doses, weight or diarrhea
may also increase. With supplements containing fish oil, some clients have reported an
unpleasant odor or increased eructation ("fish breath").

Pentoxifylline
Pentoxifylline (Trental, Hoechst-Roussel) is a methylxanthine derivative that produces a
variety of physiologic changes at the cellular level. 147 Immunomodulatory and rheologic
effects include increased leukocyte deformability and chemotaxis, decreased platelet aggregation, decreased leukocyte responsiveness to interleukin-l (IL-l) and tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-a, decreased production of TNF -a from macrophages, decreased production
of IL-l, IL-4, and IL-12, inhibition of T- and B-lymphocyte activation, and decreased
natural killer cell activity. It also has been shown to inhibit T-cell adherence to keratinocytes. 24 In humans, these effects are beneficial in the treatment of peripheral vascular
disease, vasculitis, and contact hypersensitivity.
Pentoxif)rlline also has been used for a variety of inflammatory diseases such as
necrobiosis lipoidica, granuloma annulare, and brown recluse spider bites. The drug also
affects wound healing and connective tissue disorders through increased production of
collagenase and decreased production of collagen, fibronectin, and glycosaminoglycans. In
humans, the drug has been used to treat scleroderma. Pentoxifylline has been used in
veterinary medicine for the treatment of canine familial dermatomyositis 7J and allergic
contact dermatitis'P? and in some atopic dogs. We have used it successfully in pinnal
thrombovascular necrosis, ear-margin dermatosis, vasculitis, rabies vaccine-related alopecia, erythema multiforme, and idiopathic mucinosis of the Chinese Shar Pei. Anecdotal
reports indicate that pentoxifylline may be useful in dogs with lupoid onychodystrophy,
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus, acral lick dermatitis, Greyhound vasculopathy,
and metatarsal fistulae of German Shepherds.F"
Pentoxifylline is available in a 400-mg coated tablet. It is usually dosed at 10 mglkg
q8h to q24h or tablets are broken and given q12h or q48h, depending on the size of the
dog. Once there is a favorable response, which may take 1 to 3 months, the dose may be
tapered to q12h or q24h. Some cases require the q8h dosing to remain effective.
Side effects are minimal and usually consist of vomiting and diarrhea. There is an
anecdotal report of thrombocytopenia. 143a

Synthetic Retinoids
Retinoids refer to all the chemicals, natural or synthetic, that have vitamin A activity.
Synthetic retinoids are primarily retinol, retinoic acid, or retinal derivatives or analogs.
They have been developed with the intent of amplifying certain biological effects while
being less toxic than their natural precursors. More than 1500 synthetic retinoids have
been developed and evaluated.P" 139 Retinoids are usually classified as being first generation (e.g., tretinoin, isotretinoin), second generation or monoaromatic (e.g., etretinate,
acitretin), or third generation or polyaromatic (e.g., adapalene, tazarotenel.P'"
Different synthetic drugs, all classed as synthetic retinoids, may have profoundly
different pharmacologic effects, side effects, and disease indications. The existence of
different types of receptors, dimers, response elements, and intermediary proteins means
that retinoid physiology is mediated by multiple pathways. Nonselective retinoids that
activate multiple pathways are likely to be associated with a high incidence of adverse
effects." With all the retinoid research being conducted, there will undoubtedly be many
new discoveries and uses in the near future. To date, the biggest deterrent to their use is
expense.
Naturally occurring vitamin A is an alcohol, all-trans retinol. It is oxidized in the body

242 • Dennatologic Therapy
to retinal and retinoic acid. Each of these compounds has variable metabolic and biological activities, although both are important in the induction and maintenance of normal
growth and differentiation of keratinocytes. Only retinol has all the known functions of
vitamin A.
Two compounds have been used clinically the most in veterinary dermatology: isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid [Accutane, Roche]), synthesized as a natural metabolite of
retinol, and etretinate (Tegison, Roche), a synthetic retinoid. Etretinate is no longer
available but is mentioned because many of the studies in veterinary medicine used it. It
has been replaced by acitretin, which is a carboxylic acid, metabolically active metabolite
of etretinate. Acitretin is less toxic owing to a shorter terminal elimination half-life of 2
days versus etretinate's 100 days. Etretinate is stored in body fat and has been found in
trace amounts up to 3 years after cessation of therapy. 135
Retinoids function by entering cells and being transported to the nuclei, where they
interact with specific gene regulatory receptors. The natural vitamin A works at the
cellular level by binding first to the cell membrane then transferring through the cellular
cytoplasm by specific proteins, cellular retinol binding protein, and cellular retinoic acid
binding protein. There are nuclear retinoid receptor molecules that transfer the retinoids
through the nucleus.
There are two main nuclear receptor families: the retinoic acid receptors and the
retinoid X receptors.l'" They both have at least three members for a minimum of six
different nuclear receptors. These receptors can function as heterodimers, homodimers, or
in conjunction with other nuclear receptors such as those for vitamin D 3 and thyroid
hormone. The nuclear receptor(s) and retinoid complex then bind with specific areas of
target genes and alter gene transcription. A new class of retinoids are being investigated
that may act by a unique mechanism and has been called inverse agonists. Another
mechanism by which retinoids function is by suppression of other nuclear transcription
factors, which results in less production of other proteins. This is thought to be a
mechanism responsible for some of the anti-inflammatory effects.
Some of the different tissue and individual sensitivity for toxic effects may relate to
the relative and absolute levels of the cellular and nuclear binding proteins present in the
target cells. Once these genetic changes are made, the cells may alter their growth and
differentiation by altering the expression of growth factors, keratins, and transglutaminases.v" Another method of action relates to an anti-inflammatory effect in epithelial
structures by the downregulation of nitrites and TNF _a. ll
All retinoids have variable antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory
effects. Because of their numerous pharmacologic effects, retinoids are being used in the
management of numerous diseases in humans. The long list includes such diverse diseases
as acne, gram-negative folliculitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, the ichthyoses, multiple forms
of psoriasis, a variety of cutaneous neoplasms, epidermal nevi, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planus, cutaneous sarcoidosis, Darier's disease,
and acanthosis nigricans. 48, 135 The biological effects of retinoids are numerous, but their
ability to regulate proliferation, growth, and differentiation of epithelial tissues is their
major benefit in dermatology.ll However, retinoids also affect proteases, prostaglandins,
humoral and cellular immunity, and cellular adhesion and communication.l'" In general,
the response of established skin cancers to retinoids is disappointing, with remissions
being uncommon, incomplete, and of short duration." Retinoids enhance wound healing
by stimulating fibroblasts to produce various chemicals (e.g., TGF-B).49
Isotretinoin is usually dosed at 1 to 3 mglkg q24h and appears to be indicated in
diseases that require alteration or normalization of adnexal structures, although some
epidermal diseases may respond.?? Diseases in which isotretinoin has been reported to be
effective in veterinary dermatology include Schnauzer comedo syndrome.?? sebaceous adenitis (particularly early in the disease in Poodles and Vizslas or shorthaired
breedsi.?" 139, 180 ichthyosis." feline acne.P" epitheliotropic lymphoma.P" 139,213 keratoacanthoma.P" 139, 213 and sebaceous gland hyperplasias and adenomas.P? Isotretinoin has been
ineffective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker spaniels and Basset hounds and

Dennatologic Therapy • 243

epidermal dysplasia of West Highland white terriers ..52 , 80, 139 It was also ineffective in the
treatment of preneoplastic and squamous cell carcinoma lesions in cats ..50
Isotretinoin must be administered with food or absorption is quite variable.t"? Toxicity
of isotretinoin in the dog and cat appears to be less of a problem than in humans.P" 139 In
the dog, conjunctivitis, hyperactivity, pruritus, pedal and mucocutaneous junction erythema, stiffness, vomiting, diarrhea, and keratoconjunctivitis may occur. Laboratory abnormalities that are generally not associated with clinical signs include hypertriglyceridemia,
hypercholesterolemia, and increased levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase.P" 139 In cats, conjunctivitis, diarrhea, anorexia, and
vomiting have been the major side effects.v" 90, 139 These side effects may be transient or
self-limited with discontinuation or decrease in dose of the drug. With long-term use,
skeletal abnormalities, including cortical hyperostosis, periosteal calcification, and long
bone demineralization, are a concern.v'- 90,135,138 All retinoids are potent teratogens.
Etretinate was believed to be indicated for disorders of epithelial or follicular development or keratinization. Most commonly, etretinate was given at 1 mg/kg q24h. Etretinate was reportedly effective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker and Springer
spaniels.f" 90, 139, 140 Golden retrievers, Irish setters, and some mixed breeds. It has not
been effective in West Highland white terriers, Basset hounds, or collies.P" 139 However,
one of us (C.E.G.) saw some partial responses in West Highland white terriers after
secondary Malassezia dermatitis was controlled. Although the use is more controversial,
etretinate may also be effective in sebaceous adenitis.v" 139 One study on 30 dogs with
sebaceous adenitis showed etretinate to be as effective as isotretinoin (about 50% of the
cases responding), and there was no breed difference in response.v'' Some cases that fail
to respond to one retinoid respond to the other.
Ichthyosis has also been reported to respond to etretinate. In dogs, solar dermatosis
and squamous cell carcinoma were reported to improve. lOB, 139 Follicular dysplasias such as
color dilution alopecia may also respond, with less scaling and partial hair growth. 65
Keratoacanthomas may also respond, although it appears that isotretinoin is more effective. 65 In humans, acitretin is considered as efficacious as etretinate. However, this has not
been documented in dogs and cats. It is more expensive than etretinate and, at this time,
is being dosed the same or at one half the recommended dose of etretinate. Acitretin
(Soriatane, Roche) must be given with food or absorption is highly variable.r'"
Toxicity with etretinate is similar to that with isotretinoin. In humans, etretinate is
considered safer for long-term use because of a lower propensity for producing skeletal
abnormalities. However, it is considered more of a teratogen and should be used only in
spayed females, nonbreeding males, or female dogs that will not be used for breeding.
Teratogenicity may persist even 2 years after cessation of therapy.I,35, 138, 140 Monitoring for
both synthetic retinoids includes pretreatment measurement of tear production, hemogram, chemistry profile, and urinalysis. This is repeated in 1 to 2 months and, if no
problems are detected, repeated only as deemed necessary. 139, 140
Because experience with increased triglyceride levels shows that they normalize when
animals are receiving low-fat diets, it is suggested that dogs being given etretinate may
benefit from changing to such a diet. 139, 140 Acitretin has a much shorter half-life and is
not readily stored in fat; therefore, it has less potential for post-treatment teratogenicity.l'"
However, in humans there is some conversion to etretinate, producing some, though
probably less, risk.

Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Novartis) is a fat-soluble cyclic polypeptide metabolite of the
fungus Tolypocladium inflatum gams.144 , 145, 195 It is effective in preventing human organ
transplantation rejection.l'" In animal models, it has been used with similar excellent
results.v? It is being used for a wide variety of dermatologic diseases in humans such as
atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, lichen planus, pyoderma gangrenosum, epidermolysis bullosa
acquisita, actinic dermatitis, and chronic hand eczema.v" 98 It has also been evaluated for

244 • Dermatologic Therapy
the treatment of immune-mediated skin diseases and epitheliotropic lymphoma in animals. 144 Anecdotal reports have suggested efficacy in atopic dermatitis in dogs and cats. 143a
Most clinicians use the microemulsified capsule or solution forms of cyclosporine (Neoral,
Novartis) because these products are absorbed better and produce more stable blood
levels.
Cyclosporine has low cytotoxicity relative to its immunosuppressive potency. Cyclosporine blocks IL-2 transcription and T cell responsiveness to IL-2, leading to impaired Thelper and T-cytotoxic lymphocytes." It also inhibits IFN-a transcription, thus diminishing
amplification Signals for macrophage and monocyte activation. The production of other
cytokines, including IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, TNF-a, and IFN-a may be impaired. In these ways,
cyclosporine inhibits mononuclear cell function, antigen presentation, mast cell and eosinophil production, histamine and prostaglandin release from mast cells, neutrophil adherence, natural killer cell activity, and growth and differentiation of B cells. It has also been
suggested that a mechanism of action in the treatment of atopic dermatitis involves the
inhibition of mast cell degranulation by affecting the interaction between mast cells and
nerves.P" Cyclosporine also directly inhibits histamine release from dog mast cells."
Humans experience a high incidence of nephrotoxicity and hepatic toxicity. Dogs
(daily doses of 20 to 30 mglkg) may experience gingival hyperplasia and papillomatosis,
vomiting, diarrhea, bacteriuria, bacterial skin infection, anorexia, hirsutism, involuntary
shaking, nephropathy, bone marrow suppression, and lymphoplasmacytoid dermatoSiS. 144. 145 These appear to be rare with daily doses of 5 to 10 mglkg.143a Cats are reported
to have only minor side effects (primarily soft feces), although they may be more susceptible to viral infections.v- 144, 145 Cyclosporine should probably be stopped at least 4 weeks
prior to intradermal skin testing. 14,3a
The clinical indications for cyclosporine therapy are organ transplantation and inhibition of delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions of many immune-mediated diseases. It is
used in pemphigus foliaceus and immune-mediated myasthenia gravis, thyroiditis, neuritis,
uveitis, and arthritis. Initial studies in dogs and cats with immunologic dermatoses such as
pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and discoid lupus erythematosus have
shown cyclosporine by itself to be rarely effective. 144, 14" It has been effective in canine
sebaceous adenitis (see Chap. 18). Cyclosporine has been ineffective in the treatment of
canine and feline epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides).144 Recent reports indicate
that cyclosporine is effective for the treatment of canine perianal fistulae. 1l2, 113 It is being
evaluated for the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis.P"
The oral dosage for dogs and cats is 5 to 10 mglkg daily, the dose for cats being
divided and given twice daily.93. 1405 Blood concentrations achieved after a specific dose vary
from patient to patient and within each patient over time. These variabilities are largely
determined by differences in absorption, distribution, and metabolism. Absorption may be
enhanced by administration with a fatty meal. Frequent drug monitoring is needed to
maintain blood cyclosporine concentrations in an effective range yet avoid toxicities. After
a response occurs, tapering to as low as 10 mg/kg every 48 hours may be effective.t'"
Because this is an expensive drug, the reduction to the lowest effective levels is usually
important. Additionally, the expense and marginal efficacy usually limit its use to cases of
treatment failure with or adverse reaction to alternative treatments.
Drugs that inhibit cytochrome P-450 microsomal enzyme activity (e.g., ketoconazole,
itraconazole, fluconazole, erythromycin, methylprednisolone, and allopurinol) potentiate
cyclosporine toxicity. When ketoconazole was given to normal dogs (average dose 13.6 mg/
kg/day) that had targeted blood levels of cyclosporine (average daily dose 14.5 mglkg), the
cyclosporine doses could be reduced by an average of 75%, resulting in a 57.8% savings in
the cost of therapy.39a Clinical applications of this "synergy" are awaited.

Glucocorticoid Hormones
Glucocorticoid hormones have potent effects on the skin, and they profoundly affect
immunologic and inflammatory activity..17, 143, 1052, 160. 161, 2005 They directly or indirectly affect

Dennatologic Therapy • 245

leukocyte kinetics, phagocytic defenses, cell-mediated immunity, humoral immunity, and
the production of inflammatory mediators. The major effects thought to be important in
counteracting allergic inflammatory reactions are presented in Table 3-6 and have been
reviewed.P" 159, 205 In addition, fibroblastic activity is reduced, synthesis of histamine is
delayed, and complement is inhibited. Antibody production is not stopped but may be
decreased, especially autoantibody titers.
At pharmacologic levels, glucocorticoids increase the production of lipocortin-l, which
is thought to cause a reduction in the action of phospholipase A2 on cell membranes,
which results in inhibition of the arachidonic acid cycle.38 This action is probably one of
the more clinically relevant actions in decreasing inflammation. High doses of glucocorticoids may suppress antibody production.F: 205 There is circumstantial evidence that in
some allergic dogs glucocorticoids may suppress IgE production at therapeutic protocols
used by some veterinarians.i"- 114
Glucocorticoid response to inflammatory stimuli is nonspecific: It is the same whether
it is a response to infection, trauma, toxin, or immune complex deposition. The drug must
reach the local site of inflammation to be effective, and the degree of response and
cellular protection from injury is proportionate to the concentration of glucocorticoid in
the inflamed tissue. Thus, dosages and dose intervals should vary with the patient's
specific needs.
Several other factors influence the tissue glucocorticoid effect. One is the relative
potency of the drug. Synthetic compounds made by adding methyl or fluoride groups to
the basic steroid molecule increase the potency and the duration of action. Another factor
is the effect of protein binding. Only free glucocorticoid is metabolically active. Many
synthetics are poorly protein-bound, which partly explains their relatively high potency at
low doses.
Corticosteroid-binding globulin is a specific glycoprotein that binds glucocorticoids,
but it has a relatively low binding capacity. When large doses of glucocorticoids are
administered, its capacity is exceeded, and albumin becomes the protein used for binding.
Animals with low serum albumin levels have a lower binding capacity, and the excessive
unbound glucocorticoid becomes freely available, increasing toxicity.66, 159 In addition, the
route of administration and water solubility affect the duration of action. Oral glucocorticoids, given as the free base or as esters, are rapidly absorbed. Parenteral glucocorticoids
are usually esters of acetate, diacetate, phosphate, or succinate. Acetate and diacetate are
relatively insoluble, resulting in slow release and prolonged absorption. The phosphates
and succinates are water-soluble and are rapidly absorbed. As a result, parenteral gluco-

• Table 3-6

ANTI·INFLAMMATORY ACTIONS OF
GLUCOCORTICOIDS

Effects on eosinophils

Effects on lymphocytes and monocytes

Effects on mast cells
Effects on neutrophils
Inhibition of phospholipase A"
Decreased vascular permeability
Reversal of reduced l3-adrenergic responsiveness

Decrease formation in bone marrow
Induce apoptosis and inhibit prolongation of eosinophil survival and function from IL-3 and IL-5
Reduce number of lymphocytes and monocytes that bear lowaffinity IgE and IgG receptors
Decrease serum immunoglobulin levels
Decrease all lymphocyte subpopulations
Decrease lymphocyte production of IL-I, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6, and
IFN-y
Inhibit release of IL-l and TNF-a from monocytes
May decrease number of mast cells
Decreased chemotaxis, adherence, and enzyme secretion
Decrease production of arachidonic acid metabolites
Decrease production of platelet-activating factor
Mechanism unknown
Part of this effect is by increasing the number of l3-adrenergic
receptors expressed on cell surface

IL = interleukin; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; IFN = interferon.

246 • Dennatologic Therapy
corticoids produce continuous low levels of glucocorticoid for days (water-soluble) or
weeks (water-insoluble). The effect produces significant adrenal suppression, a problem
that can be diminished by giving short-acting glucocorticoids orally every other day.
Many of the desirable properties of glucocorticoids can be responsible for adverse
effects if present in excess or at the wrong time. In addition, adverse effects may relate to
the numerous other effects that glucocorticoids have on carbohydrate, protein, and lipid
metabolism. It is imperative to make an accurate diagnosis so that the need for, type,
duration, and level of glucocorticoid therapy can be determined. Except in the case of
hypoadrenocorticism, glucocorticoids do not correct a primary deficiency but act symptomatically or palliatively. The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive actions desired for
one therapeutic need may facilitate the establishment or spread of concomitant infections
or parasitic diseases.
Animals treated with glucocorticoids tend to experience bacterial infections of the skin
and the urinary and respiratory systems.w 160 Because of the profound effects of glucocorticoids on phagocytosis and cell-mediated immunity, increased susceptibility to fungal
infections and intracellular pathogens is to be expected."

INDICATIONS
The major indications for glucocorticoid therapy are hypersensitivity dermatoses (flea-bite
hypersensitivity, atopy, and food hypersensitivity), pyotraumatic dermatitis ("hot spot"),
contact dermatitis (irritant or hypersensitivity reactions), and immune-mediated dermatoses (pemphigus, pemphigoid, and lupus erythematosus). They are occasionally used in
other inflammatory skin diseases such as keratinization and many diseases listed in Chapter 18. Whenever possible, their use should be short term (less than 3 months).
Glucocorticoids are usually only part of the management employed for most dermatoses, and the clinician must control or minimize other predisposing, precipitating, and
complicating factors to keep the glucocorticoids in their proper perspective, which is to
use them (1) as infrequently as possible, (2) at as Iowa dose as possible, (3) in altemateday regimens whenever possible, and (4) only when other less hazardous forms of therapy
have failed or could not be employed.s- 83, 160,161

ADMINISTRATION
For dermatoses, glucocorticoids are usually administered orally, by injection (intramuscularly, subcutaneously, intralesionally, and intravenously), topically, or in some combination
thereof. In any given patient, the decision as to which route or routes to employ depends
on various factors.
Of the systemic routes, oral administration is preferred because (1) it can be more
closely regulated (a daily dose is more precise than with a repository injection; the
drug can be rapidly withdrawn if undesirable side effects occur) and (2) it is the only safe,
therapeutic, physiologic way to administer glucocorticoids for more long-term therapy.22. 31. 66. 69, 82. 124. 160. 161
Injectable glucocorticoids are usually administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously.
Although most injectable glucocorticoids are licensed for only intramuscular use, many
clinicians administer them subcutaneously. The reasons purported for choosing the subcutaneous route are (1) there are few patient objections (and fewer pet-owner crises) and
(2) it is clinically as effective as intramuscular administration."?
There is a theoretical preference for using the intramuscular route in the obese
patient because subcutaneous deliveries could be sequestered in fat tissue. However, the
major reason for using the intramuscular route (other than the liability or legal issue) is to
decrease the occurrence of local atrophy. Although this problem may be more common in
humans, it also occurs in the dog. Local areas of alopecia, pigmentary changes, and
epidermal and dermal atrophy are more commonly induced by subcutaneous injection.
These reactions are noninflammatory and atrophic in contrast with most other injection

Dermatologic Therapy • 247

reactions. Yorkshire and Silky terriers, Lhasa apsos, Poodles, and Shih tzus may be
predisposed to this reaction."
An excellent injectable anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid is methylprednisolone acetate
(Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn). Clinically, dogs are given doses of 1.1 mg/kg and
cats are given 20 mg/cat or 5.5 mgikg, subcutaneously or intramuscularly, and the effect
may last for 1 week to 6 months. Other commonly used injectable glucocorticoids are
presented in Table 3-7.
Intralesional injections of glucocorticoids are often thought of as local, intracutaneous
therapy, devoid of any systemic effect. Intralesional therapy is employed for solitary or
multiple cutaneous lesions, but it has systemic effects, some of which can be serious. The
major indications for intralesional use are acral lick dermatitis, histiocytomas, sterile granulomas, eosinophilic granulomas, feline indolent ulcers, and proliferative otitis extema. In
general, triamcinolone acetonide is the glucocorticoid of choice for intralesional therapy.
Intravenous use for dermatologic indications is primarily limited to regimens of pulse
therapy for immune-mediated dermatoses. In addition to the intravenous route, high
dosages are used. In a study, dogs were hospitalized and given 11 mgikg of methylprednisolone sodium succinate intravenously in 250 ml of 5% dextrose and water during a 1hour period for 3 consecutive days.212 The reported advantages of glucocorticoid pulse
therapy include immediate symptomatic relief, avoidance of the side effects that accompany high-dose oral administration of glucocorticoids, and the ability to lower the dosage
or discontinue the use of oral glucocorticoids after the pulse therapy. The side effects
occurring with intravenous pulse therapy, such as cardiac arrhythmias, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, and gastric or duodenal ulcers, are enough of a concern, although not
routinely observed, to limit this form of therapy to animals with severe disease.F: 78, 212

CHOOSING A GLUCOCORTICOID
The choice of a glucocorticoid may be difficult. One cannot establish a single rule or set
of rules that applies to all patients with a given glucocorticoid-responsive dermatosis.
Factors that must be considered include the duration of therapy, the personality of the
patient, the personality and reliability of the owner, the response of the patient to the

• Table 3-i

INJECTABLE GLUCOCORTICOIDS FOR USE IN
PRURITIC DOGS AND CATS
MANUFACTURER'S REGIMEN

AGENT

BRAND NAME

COMPANY

Dose

Route

Betamethasone
Dexamethasone

Betasone
Azium

Schering-Plough
Schering-Plough

Dexamethasone

Generic

Many

Flumethasone

Flucort

Fort Dodge

Methylprednisolone

Depo-Medrol

Pharmacia & Upjohn

Triamcinolone

VetaIog

Fort Dodge

Prednisone

Meticorten

Schering-Plough

0,2-0.4 mgtkg in dog
0.25-1 mg/dog
0.125-0,5 mg/cat
0.25- I mg/dog
0.125-0,5 mg/cat
0,06-0.25 mg/dog
0,03-0.125 mg/cat
2-40 mg/dog
10-20 mg/cat
0,1-0.2 mgtkg in dog
0.1-0,2 mgtkg in cat
0.5-2.2 mgtkg q24h
in dog
0.5-2.2 mgtkg q24h
in cat
0.5 mgtkg q24h

1M
1M
1M
1M
1M
1M or SC
1M or SC
1M
1M
1M or SC
1M or SC
1M

Generic
1M = intramuscular; SC = subcutaneous.

Many

1M
1M

248 • Dermatologic Therapy
drug, the response of the patient's disease to the drug, and other considerations specific to
the patient or the disease.
The personality of the patient can significantly influence the choice of glucocorticoid;
witness the attempts to administer pills to the obstreperous cat that is a blur of fur, fangs,
and claws. Likewise, the reliability of the owner can be the deciding factor: There are
owners who cannot, or will not, give oral medicaments to their pets. However, for longterm use even in these situations, the risk of injectable glucocorticoids overrides these
drawbacks.
The clinician learns, by history or personal experience, that some glucocorticoids do
not seem to work as well as others in certain patients. However, the claim that injectable
glucocorticoids are needed in some cases and that oral glucocorticoids are not effective is
rarely accurate. In the majority of these cases, ineffective oral dosages were used or
tapered too fast. A common mistake is to give an injection, then go immediately to a low
alternate-day oral dose. 67, 160 In some cases, the problem probably reflects dosage, absorption, and metabolic differences.
As a corollary, the clinician notes that, in some patients, a glucocorticoid that was
previously satisfactory apparently loses its effectiveness. For example, in an atopic dog that
initially did well when given prednisolone, the prednisolone seemed to lose its effect.
Subsequently, the dog responded well to equipotent doses of orally administered triamcinolone, In most cases, after a variable length of time, the clinician is able to return to
managing the atopy successfully with prednisolone. This well-recognized but poorly understood phenomenon is called steroid tachyphylaxis. 46 , 160 However, in most clinical cases
referred to dermatology specialists for the development of steroid resistance or steroid
tachyphylaxis, the real problem is the development of concurrent disorders.s- 160 In such
cases, secondary bacterial pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, increased exposure to fleas or
reactions to ongoing topical therapy are often the reasons for failure of previously effective
glucocorticoid regimens.
Finally, the clinician may discover, by history or personal experience, that a patient
can receive certain glucocorticoids without significant adverse effects but not other glucocorticoids. Hence, a dog may experience colitis or behavioral changes with prednisolone
but not with methylprednisolone, dexamethasone, or triamcinolone. In some cases, switching to methylprednisolone or triamcinolone may have a relative steroid-sparing effect. A
lower dose than the prednisolone equivalent may be effective for that disease in that
animal. In some cases, signs of iatrogenic Cushing's disease or marked liver enzyme
activity elevations greatly improve on the alternative glucocorticoid alternate-day regimen.v'

THERAPEUTIC DOSAGE
Optimal therapeutic doses have not been scientifically determined for any canine or feline
dermatosis. Presently espoused anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, antiallergic, or immunosuppressive glucocorticoid doses have been determined through years of clinical experience.
Moreover, it is imperative to remember that every patient is unique and that glucocorticoid therapy must be individualized. Recommended glucocorticoid doses are only guidelines.
The two most commonly used oral glucocorticoids are prednisolone and prednisone.
For all practical purposes, these two drugs are identical (the choice of one or the other is
usually based on cost). However, prednisone must be converted in the liver to prednisolone, the active form. Dosage recommendations in this text are based on prednisolone
(prednisone) equivalents. Table 3-8 contains information on approximate equipotent dosages of other oral glucocorticoids.
Physiologic doses of glucocorticoids are those that approximate the daily cortisol
(hydrocortisone) production by normal individuals. In dogs, daily cortisol production has
been reported to be 0.2 to 1 mglkglday.161 No such information is available for cats.
Pharmacologic doses of glucocorticoids exceed physiologic requirements. Significantly, any

Dermatologic Therapy • 249
• Table 3-8

RELATIVE POTENCY AND ACTIVITY OF ORAL
GLUCOCORTICOIDS
EQUIVALENT DOSE

DRUG

(mg)

DURATION OF EFFECT
(h)

ALTERNATE-DAY
THERAPY

8-12
8-12

NAS
NAS

24-36
24-36
24-36

P
P
P

36-48
36-48
36-54
36-54

Ai

Short-Aeting
Cortisone
Hydrocortisone

25

20

Intermediate-Aeting
Prednisone
Prednisolone
Methylprednisolone

5
5
4

Long-Aeting
Flumethasone
Triamcinolone
Dexamethasone
Betamethasone

1.3

0.5t
0.5
0.4

i

NAS = not acceptable because of short duration; P = preferred; A = alternative selection for alternate-day therapy.
fPrevious publications stated dosages often equivalent to those of methylprednisolone. No studies on clinical effects are available.
! May be useful on every-third-day regimen.

pharmacologic dose of glucocorticoid, no matter how large or small, may suppress the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.160. 165. 181
Clinicians usually talk in terms of anti-inflammatory versus immunosuppressive doses
of glucocorticoids. A commonly used anti-inflammatory (as in allergic dermatoses) induction dosage of oral prednisolone in dogs is 1.1 mglkg q24h. However, in severe allergy,
such as the dog with flea bite hypersensitivity that has numerous fleas, a higher dosage of
1.75 to 2 mglkglday may often be needed.v' For maintenance, the dosage should be
lowered as much as possible and optimally ends up at less than 0.25 to 0.5 mglkg every
48 hours. For immune-mediated diseases, the initial dosage is usually 2.2 mglkg q24h. If
there is no response, this may be raised to as high as 6.6 mglkg q24h.
Many clinicians (D.W.S., W.H.M.; see also ref. 69) administer oral glucocorticoids
only once daily and find no loss of clinical efficacy but a definite reduction in side effects.
A commonly used immunosuppressive maintenance dosage for dogs is 1.1 mg of prednisolone per kilogram every other morning.
In general, compared with dogs, cats require about twice the dose of glucocorticoid
orally for induction (anti-inflammatory: 2.2 mglkgld; immunosuppressive: 4.4 mglkgld) and
maintenance therapy."- 159-161. 172 Resistance of cats to glucocorticoid effects may relate to
their decreased number of glucocorticoid receptors.P" It is probable that the diurnal
rhythm of dogs and cats is not dramatic, and timing dosages to morning or evening hours
is less important than was previously thought. It is important, however, to maintain the
24-hour alternate-day freedom from medication so that adrenal suppression and chronic
side effects are minimized.

REGIMEN
Glucocorticoid regimens vary with the nature of the dermatosis, the specific glucocorticoid
being administered, and the use of induction versus maintenance therapy.
In general, dermatoses necessitating anti-inflammatory doses of oral glucocorticoid
need smaller doses and shorter periods of daily induction therapy to bring about remission
compared with dermatoses necessitating immunosuppressive doses. Anti-inflammatory induction doses are usually given for 2 to 6 days, whereas immunosuppressive induction
doses are often administered for 4 to 10 days, Initially, the doses are given every 24 hours
or divided and given every 12 hours for 2 to 4 days; then, the total daily dose is given
every 24 hours. This is continued until signs of disease are markedly decreased or in
remission. After this point, tapering to maintenance therapy begins.

250 • Dennatologic Therapy
Maintenance therapy with oral glucocorticoid is best accomplished with prednisolone,
prednisone, or methylprednisolone on alternate days.32. 160. 161. 165 Oral triamcinolone is
often effective in managing prednisone-responsive cases at doses of approximately 10% to
20% of the prednisone dose (on a milligram basis).66, 160 According to the standard
published glucocorticoid potency equivalency, this is a significant steroid-sparing effect.
However, because triamcinolone suppresses the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis for 24
to 48 hours, it is best given every 72 hours.
With alternate-day therapy, the daily dose of glucocorticoid used for successful induction therapy is given as a single massive dose, usually every other morning for dogs and
every other evening for cats. Some clinicians (D.W.S. and W.H.M.) begin alternate-day
therapy as soon as remission is achieved with induction therapy.160, 161 Other investigators
gradually reduce one alternate-day dose until no drug is given, whereas the other alternate-day dose remains at the induction dose.s" For maintenance therapy, the alternate-day
dose is reduced by 50%, every 1 to 2 weeks, until the lowest satisfactory maintenance
dose is achieved. This regimen does not eliminate adrenal atrophy, but the atrophy is less
severe and its onset is delayed. It is the only dosage system that should be used for longterm therapy of steroid-responsive diseases in small animals.
In some animals, alternate-day glucocorticoid therapy can be extended to every third
or fourth day. Rarely, anti-inflammatory alternate-day glucocorticoid therapy with the
preferred prednisolone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone is not successful. In these
cases, the clinician has three therapeutic options (assuming that glucocorticoid therapy is
all that can be done):
1. Administer prednisolone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone daily, informing the

owner of the inevitability of iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.
2. Switch to a more potent oral glucocorticoid on an alternate-day basis.
3. Switch to injectable glucocorticoids.
Although the more potent oral glucocorticoids are usually satisfactory for alternate-day
therapy unless given at low doses, they do not spare the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis (because of potency and duration of effect). They may occasionally be employed with
few or no Significant side effects, especially in cats. 54 , 160 Clinically, the most satisfactory
agents in this respect appear to be triamcinolone and dexamethasone. Because of factors
related to the patient and the owner, not the disease, some animals may be satisfactorily
managed with only injectable glucocorticoids.
Intramuscular or subcutaneous glucocorticoid therapy is usually fine for acute, shortterm diseases that necessitate a single injection. Additionally, animals that need only three
or four injections per year probably do not experience significant side effects. However,
for dermatoses that need long-term maintenance therapy, injectable glucocorticoids are
usually not satisfactory. It has been shown that a Single intramuscular injection of methylprednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) is capable of altering adrenocortical function in dogs for at least 5, and up to 10, weeks.s! In other studies, a Single
intramuscular injection of triamcinolone acetonide (Vetalog, Fort Dodge) was capable of
altering adrenocortical function in dogs for up to 4 weeks. 82. 160
Intralesional injections of glucocorticoids are usually repeated every 7 to 10 days until
the dermatosis is in remission (usually two to four treatments) and then given as needed.

SIDE EFFECTS
The side effects associated with systemic glucocorticoid therapy in dogs are numerOUS. 161. 16.5 In contrast, cats appear relatively tolerant to this therapy, although they infrequently experience iatrogenic Cushing's disease with unkempt haircoat, curling of the
pinnae, alopecia, thin and easily tom skin, and diabetes mellitus. Rare cases may even
involve steroid hepatopathy.I'"
Because of the diverse effects of glucocorticoids on protein, lipid, and carbohydrate
metabolism; endocrine function; fluid balance; and host defense mechanisms, it is expected that glucocorticoids are associated with many side effects. Sequelae may appear

Dennatologic Therapy • 251

with any duration or form of glucocorticoid therapy. In most cases, the side effects with
short-term therapy may also occur with long-term therapy but are not generally major
health problems. The exceptions are the acute sequelae of high-dose therapy. These
include gastrointestinal ulceration, perforation, myopathy, and pancreatitis. These side
effects most commonly occur with dosages at or greater than 2.2 mglkglday of prednisone
(or equipotent doses of other glucocorticoids).
In a study published in 1998, 105 dogs with neurologic injury were treated with
prednisolone sodium succinate at 30 mglkg IV q6h for 36 hcurs.P In this group of dogs,
none of the serious side effects was seen, suggesting that the incidence is relatively low.
One third of the dogs did experience less severe complications, including diarrhea and
melena in 10%, and lower percentages experienced vomiting, hematochezia, anorexia, and
hematemesis. In other studies, dogs given 15 to 30 mglkg methylprednisolone sodium
succinate intravenously developed gastric hemorrhage which was not prevented by misoprostol.l43b. 143c
The other side effects that are not related to treatment duration include polyuria,
polydipsia, polyphagia (which may lead to weight gain), behavioral changes (depression,
hyperactivity, and aggression), panting, and diarrhea. Most of these side effects are somewhat dose-related. However, the disease being treated may not be controllable at a dosage
that does not produce the undesired results. In general, these side effects are minimized
with low-dose, alternate-day therapy or may occur on only the day of treatment. Switching
types of glucocorticoid may also eliminate these sequelae. About 30% of the dogs treated
with anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone or prednisolone experience side effects that
are sufficiently undesirable to necessitate stopping treatment. This percentage drops to
about 10% when methylprednisolone is used.
Long-term therapy is associated with many more side effects, particularly side effects
leading to poor health or disease. Of major concern is the increased risk of infections. A
variety of bacterial infections may occur, but the most common are bacteriuria, pyoderma,
septicemia, and respiratory infections. Prolonged distention of the bladder with dilute
urine likely contributes to the increased incidence of urinary tract infections in dogs on
long-term glucocorticoid therapy. Generalized demodicosis or Malassezia dermatitis may
also occur. Common cutaneous and subcutaneous changes include dry poor coat, dry scaly
skin, fat redistribution, and an increase in lipomas or their size. In more susceptible dogs
or dogs receiving higher dosages, alopecia, thin skin, hypotonic skin, calcinosis cutis,
atrophic remodeling of scars, comedones, and milia-like follicular cysts may occur alone or
in combination.
Musculoskeletal abnormalities may go unrecognized as glucocorticoid side effects.
Osteoporosis, muscle atrophy, and weak ligaments may result from the glucocorticoid
effects of protein catabolism, fibroblast inhibition, and decreased intestinal calcium absorption. Although no studies have documented an association, it has been suggested that dogs
receiving long-term glucocorticoid therapy are at higher risk for ligament damage, particularly cruciate rupture.l'" Steroid myopathy and traumatic rupture of the gastrocnemius
muscle was attributed to glucocorticoid therapy in one dog.141
The alteration in metabolism may lead to hyperlipidemia and steroid hepatopathy.
Endocrine changes induced may include adrenal gland suppressions, then atrophy, diabetes mellitus, decreased thyroid hormone synthesis, and increased parathyroid hormone
levels. Significant side effects with appropriate anti-inflammatory systemic glucocorticoid
regimens are uncommon in dogs, occurring in less than 10% of the animals treated.
However, with immunosuppressive regimens, the frequency and the severity of glucocorticoid side effects escalate alarmingly and less than 50% of the dogs so treated can be
satisfactorily managed.160, 173
It must be emphasized that alternate-day therapy with prednisolone is not a panacea.P Occasionally, some dogs cannot be successfully managed with such therapy without
experiencing iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.l'" 161. 173 This probably reflects differences
in serum protein levels, receptor levels, or absorption, metabolism, or clearance of glucocorticoid in those individuals. Additionally, individual variation is occasionally dramatic in
susceptibility to acute or chronic glucocorticoid side effects;160, 161 therefore, (1) various

252 • Dennatologic Therapy
degrees of iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism occur after as little as 3 weeks to as long as 7
years of therapy, and (2) calcinosis cutis or full-blown Cushing's syndrome may be an
individual dog's only manifestation of hyperglucocorticoidism.P'r Pv-'"
Although clinically effective doses of systemic glucocorticoids in cats are usually twice
those needed in dogs, significant side effects are rare. 1,58, 160, 161 Polydipsia, polyuria,
polyphagia, a tendency for weight gain, depression, and diarrhea occasionally occur. Significant iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism has been produced in cats only after the weekly
subcutaneous administration of methylprednisolone acetate for 10 weeks. Cats rarely experience typical iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome with fewer doses.P" Obviously, such therapy
would never be either employed or indicated in clinical situations.
Significant side effects after intralesional glucocorticoid therapy have not been reported in dogs and cats. Local cutaneous atrophy and local inflammatory reactions (presumably due to crystalline material left at the injection site) are rare. These side effects,
as well as panniculitis, sterile abscesses, necrosis, and pigmentary disturbances, are well
recognized in humans.f" 181, 186
A potentially much more significant side effect of intralesional therapy is systemic
hyperglucocorticoidism.l'vJ" Normal dogs given subconjunctival injections of methylprednisolone acetate had suppressed adrenocortical responses to exogenous ACTH for 9 to 20
days.172 Additionally, dogs that received intracutaneous or subconjunctival injections of
methylprednisolone or betamethasone were unresponsive to intradermal histamine and
skin test allergens for up to 4 weeks. The health significance of such findings in dogs is
unknown. Certainly, such medications could influence interpretation of results of hematologic, adrenal function, and intradermal allergy skin tests.

EVALUATION
Evaluation of the results during glucocorticoid therapy is important. When appropriate
systemic anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid therapy is given to an otherwise healthy dog or
cat, the risks are minimal. The risks associated with immunosuppressive doses are of
greater concern, especially because the medication is usually prescribed for serious or lifethreatening diseases, which will probably be treated for the rest of the animal's life.
Significant concurrent dysfunction of major organ systems also drastically increases the
risks. Some owners balk at the expense, the risk, the unpleasant side effects, or the
complex therapy protocol, and they refuse treatment. Occasionally, the clinician may be
forced to choose between using drugs that may not be in the animal's best long-term
interest or performing euthanasia at the owner's request.
When long-term systemic therapy is started, owners should be instructed to observe
their animals closely and to immediately report any significant side effects. A physical
check-up is advised every 6 to 12 months. Periodic urinalysis and urine cultures may be
needed to recognize urinary tract infections that are not clinically apparent. Serum chemistry screens are advised every 12 to 24 months before more medication is dispensed. The
ACTH response test is useful in animals with suspected iatrogenic Cushing's disease.
Marked suppression indicates that other attempts at lowering the dosage should be made
because major problems are inevitable. Dogs receiving appropriate long-term, alternateday steroid therapy usually have mildly to moderately suppressed adrenocortical responses
to ACTH and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase levels but are otherwise clinically
normal.

Interferons
Interferons are a family of regulatory proteins that can act on a variety of different cell
types and profoundly affect a number of biological functions, including host defense
mechanisms against viral and bacterial infections; cell proliferation, differentiation, and
functional activation; antitumor effects; IFN-'}' immunomodulation; monocyte and macrophage activation; cytotoxic T cell activation and differentiation; stimulation of MHC I and
II expression; B cell antibody production; regulation of lipid metabolism, and direct and

Dennatologic Therapy > 253

indirect activation of numerous cytokines. 145a In humans, various recombinant products
(IFN-a-2a [Roferon-A, Roche]; IFN-a-2b [Intron-A, Schering]; IFN-t3-1b [Betaseron,
Berlex]) are used with variable success for everything from melanomas, papillomas, and
epitheliotroptc lymphoma to atopy, discoid lupus erythematosus, and chronic granulomatous disease.
In dogs and cats, anecdotal reports indicate that IFN-a-2a (Roferon-A) and IFN-a-2b
are being tried in a number of dermatologic conditions.P'" These include multiple papillomas in young and old dogs and cats, herpesvirus dermatitis in cats, idiopathic facial
dermatosis of Himalayan and Persian cats, epitheliotropic lymphoma in dogs, and recurrent bacterial pyoderma in dogs. Some cases of feline indolent ulcer have responded, but
eosinophilic plaques and eosinophilic granulomas have not.
The standard dilution procedure is as follows: 3 million IV into 1 L of sterile saline
gives a solution of 3000 IV/ml, which can be frozen for 1 year. Ten milliliters of this
solution added to 1 L of sterile saline gives a solution of 30 IV/ml, which can be stored
(not frozen) in the refrigerator for several months. This solution may be given orally or
subcutaneously. Doses for dogs vary from 1 to 1.5 million IV/m 2 BSA to 1 to 3 million
IV/dog/day or 3 times weekly. The dose for cats is 60 to 120 IV/cat/day. Little factual
information is available on the immunologic and therapeutic effects of interferons in dogs
and cats.
In humans, side effects are usually mild and reversible, with flulike symptoms being
the most common.v" Side effects are not reported in dogs and cats.

Melatonin
The hormone melatonin is synthesized in the pineal gland from L-tryptophan. It is most
readily known and often studied in reptilian and amphibian species. Melatonin is involved
in the neuroendocrine control of photoperiod-dependent molting and/or pelage color in
many mammals. The hormone may act directly on hair follicles or within the central
nervous system to alter secretion of melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) and/or prolactin. Melatonin secretion is tied to the photoperiod, with the greatest production during
dark hours. Greatest daily secretion occurs in the winter, when the length of daylight is
shortest.132
When melatonin was administered orally to normal dogs, blood levels were significantly increased for 8 hours." In female dogs, there was a significant decrease in blood
levels of estradiol, testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone. In male dogs, there was a
Significant decrease in blood levels of estradiol and 17-0H progesterone. Blood levels of
prolactin and thyroid hormone were unaffected.
There is an inverse relation with circulating prolactin levels and the secretion of
MSH.132 Melatonin and prolactin levels may be involved in the seasonal growth of winter
haircoats and spring molt in mammalian species such as mink, in which implants of
melatonin have been used to artificially induce early winter coat production.
The original uses for melatonin in veterinary dermatology go back to the 1960s, when
it was recommended for the treatment of acanthosis nigricans. 142 However, melatonin has
recently received attention because of possible effects on a variety of canine hair growth
disorders. The beneficial effects of melatonin for the treatment of chronic recurrent flank
alopecia and various forms of pattern baldness have been reported.130, 131 In canine
recurrent flank alopecia, nine dogs were treated, three with two subcutaneous injections of
melatonin (12.5 mg) in soybean oil at 2-week intervals and six dogs with 36 mg of
melatonin subcutaneous implants. All nine dogs failed to experience the typical recurrence
of alopecia. 130
In canine pattern baldness, 11 dogs all had improved hair growth after melatonin
therapy. Seven dogs received subcutaneous implants, but four dogs were treated orally
with 5 mg q24h for 30 days.P! We and others have noted varying responses to oral
melatonin treatment with these diseases. In addition, cases with pinnal alopecia, suspected
adrenal sex hormone imbalance, or alopecia associated with excessive trichilemmal keratinization histologically have responded to melatonin treatment.F"

254 • Dermatologic Therapy
Melatonin is available in nonprescription form as a dietary supplement at most health
food stores, often in 3-mg tablets. Only licensed products have guaranteed purity. Capsules can be made from melatonin crystalline powder (Sigma Chemical Company). Oral
melatonin has a short half-life, and empirical protocols call for 3 to 6 mg/dog q8h. The
relative efficacy of oral versus injectable or subcutaneous implant therapy still needs to be
evaluated. Injectable melatonin is available from Rickards Research Foundation (Cleveland, OR). Constant-release implants with 2.5 mg or 12 mg are available from Wildlife
Pharmaceuticals (Fort Collins, CO).l32 Some dogs receiving subcutaneous implants experience sterile abscesses or granulomas.

• ORAL SUNSCREENS
Oral sunscreens are chemicals such as B-carotene and chloroquine that quench free
radicals and stabilize membranes. They have not been proved to prevent sunburn in
humans but have been useful in cases of light-induced dermatosis. 102, 150 A f3-carotene
derivative has been used in cats and dogs to reduce phototoxicity (see Chap. 16). Canthaxanthin (f3,f3-carotene-4, -dione) is a red-orange pigment found in plants and other
sources. The safety of this product has been challenged. Side effects include orangebrown skin, brick-red stools, crystalline gold deposits on the retinae, orange plasma, and
lowered amplitudes on electroretinograms. The usual maximal dosage for humans is 25
mgikg daily, but some companies recommend four 30-mg capsules once daily (Golden
Tan, Orobronze). In toxicity studies of dogs, the long-term and short-term lethal dose is
greater than 10,000 mgikg.
I

• SKIN SURGERY
Skin surgery can be an important part of small animal dermatology. Many new developments have arisen, from skin biopsies for diagnosis to cryosurgery for specialized procedures. It is essential to know what equipment is needed and to be able to use the
equipment properly. Cold steel surgery, cryosurgery, laser surgery, and electrosurgery are
discussed in this chapter. Biopsy techniques are covered in Chapter 2.
Dermatologists recommend plastic surgery for the correction of anatomic defects
causing dermatoses of facial, tail, vulva, and lip folds. Skin grafting (pinch, strip, mesh,
and pedicle grafts) is useful to repair defects of skin of the extremities when tumors or
lesions such as acral lick dermatitis have been removed surgically. Plastic repair of ear
flaps and the external ear canal may be helpful in correcting associated dermatologic or
cosmetic problems. Plastic surgery techniques are not discussed in this chapter, but
information on them can be found in references.P 177. 183

Cold Steel Surgery
Excision of small tumors and other lesions is a minor procedure that can often be
performed on an outpatient basis but is usually better performed if the animal is held in
the hospital for several hours. This enables the practitioner to use tranquilization, sedation, or general anesthesia as needed to promote control and relaxation of the patient.
Cases requiring extensive surgery with plastic repair procedures and grafts need an operating room with complete aseptic routine. Even minor cases, however, must be handled
with proper preparation, sterile instruments, and other measures to accomplish a scrupulously clean operation,
The dermatologist who employs surgical treatment of human diseases usually performs minor techniques on skin that is relatively hairless; therefore, the cosmetic effects
are crucial. Most procedures appear complex because avoidance of scarring is a primary
consideration. In veterinary dermatology, the clinician should, of course, avoid disfigurement, but because of the dense pelage, small scars are relatively unimportant.

Dennatologic Therapy' 255
With any surgical procedure, it is necessary to clip the hair closely, wash the unbroken skin surface carefully until it is clean using a surgical scrub solution such as 1%
chlorhexidine diacetate (Nolvasan, Fort Dodge) or 0.75% povidone-iodine (Betadine, Purdue Frederick), and rinse thoroughly. The skin is defatted by wiping the surface in a
circular fashion from the center outward, using sterile swabs soaked in 70% alcohol. The
skin can then be sprayed or swabbed with 0.5% solution of chlorhexidine diacetate or, as
a second choice, 1% solution of povidone-iodine. The surgical site is then ready to drape.
If a mast cell tumor is suspected, one should avoid a rough surgical preparation, which
could trigger the release of vasoactive substances.
Basic instruments needed for skin surgery are in the average emergency or spay pack.
The following additional instruments are useful for the delicate work in many skin surgical
procedures:
1. Bard-Parker handles and blades, Nos. 10, 11, and 15
2. Small curved mosquito hemostats
3. Allis tissue forceps
4. Skin hooks (sharp single prong)
5. Iris forceps (mouse-toothed)
6. Olsen-Hegar needle holder with suture scissors
7. Skin punches, sizes 1 to 9 mm
8. Small automatic skin retractor

The lesions should be outlined by elliptic scalpel incisions that extend through the
skin. The specimen or lesion is dissected free from the underlying tissue with scissors,
hemostats, or both. Healing and final results are better if the long-axis incisions are
oriented parallel to the tension lines. For closure, nylon sutures such as Vetafil produce
good approximation with minimal scarring. Many quality suture materials are available,
and the exact selection is a matter of personal preference. Swaged-on needles can further
reduce the chance of infection and result in smaller scars. In routine cases with small
incisions, the sutures can be removed in 10 to 14 days.

Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery is the controlled use of freezing temperatures to destroy undesirable tissue
while doing minimal damage to surrounding healthy tissue. In general, cryosurgery is the
most useful for small, localized skin lesions treated on an outpatient basis. Cryosurgery
does not cure where a blade does not cure, but it is sometimes more convenient.
The anal and oral areas are preferred sites for cryosurgery, and it is indicated in
selected cases of acral lick dermatitis. Specific conditions in which cryosurgery may be
indicated include perianal fistulae, oral tumors, rectal tumors, nasal mucosal tumors, tail
gland hyperplasia, feline indolent ulcers, and acral lick dermatitis. In the nasal, oral, and
rectal areas, where surgical access and hemostasis are difficult, cryosurgery has advantages.
In large lesions of acral lick dermatitis that cannot be removed by cold steel surgery,
cryosurgery offers a favorable alternative to skin grafting. For readers who are seriously
considering using cryosurgery, excellent references are available. 177. 209
The discussion of cryosurgery includes basic principles, freezing agents, cryosurgical
units, and dermatologic indications.

BASIC PRINCIPLES
The lethal effect of subzero temperatures on cells depends on five factors:
1. Type of cell being frozen
2. Rate of freezing
3. Final temperature (must be at least - 20°C)
4. Rate of thawing
5. Repetition of the freeze-thaw cycle

256 • Dennatologic Therapy
Cell damage is more severe with rapid freezing, slow thawing, and three freeze-thaw
cycles. A final temperature of - 70°C is reached at the surface of the probe with nitrous
oxide equipment so that it can cool only a limited mass of tissue below the required
- 20°C, thereby restricting its application to small, superficial lesions. A final temperature
of - 185°C can be reached at the tissue junction using liquid nitrogen. This enables the
forming of a larger ice ball of tissue and allows larger areas to be effectively frozen.
A spray of liquid nitrogen is the most effective way to freeze large tumor masses, but
this technique poses the greatest potential hazard if used carelessly. One advantage is that
the base or periphery of a mass can be frozen first by careful spraying around a delineated area extending 3 to 5 mm beyond the visible edge. The remaining tissues within
this frozen "stockade" can be treated by spraying in ever-decreasing circles. Used with
care, the spray may prevent the escape of malignant cells into the circulation, and it
enables the operator to form superficial, solid frozen plaques on the surface without
damaging deeper structures. In contrast, a probe must freeze a hemisphere as deep as the
visible radius. It is important to use needle thermocouples at the deep margins of the
tissues to be frozen to monitor the effect and to prevent excessive damage to normal
tissue.
In human dermatology, it is common to apply liquid nitrogen with an ordinary cotton
applicator stick, which is dipped into the container of liquid and touched to the lesion,
frequently a small tumor or wart. The applicator stick is touched intermittently to the
lesion until the desired area and depth are frozen. Dermatologists with experience in
using this method get good results. The pain is minimal and well tolerated without local
anesthesia by most patients.
Many soft tissues, especially glandular tissues, are particularly susceptible to freezing.
On the other hand, bone, fascia, tendon sheath, perineurium, and the walls of large blood
vessels are fairly resistant. A knowledge of relative tissue susceptibility is of great practical
importance.
To ensure that no cells escape destruction, the freeze-thaw cycle should be repeated
two times or more. Thawing usually takes one and a half to two times as long as freezing.
Freezing is accomplished much more rapidly during the second and third freeze because
circulation to the target area has been compromised.
It has been speculated that useful immunologic effects are possible with cryosurgery.
When a cell mass is frozen and left to die in situ, membrane lipoprotein complexes, and
hence antigen-antibody complexing and receptor sites, are inevitably disrupted or altered.
They are probably not totally destroyed. The nucleus may remain relatively intact. Thus,
for a short time, antigenicity may be enhanced. Enough antigen is released systemically to
produce a strong specific immunologic response that may kill escaped cells of the same
tumor species.
After cryosurgery of canine skin tissue, histopathologic changes occur in an orderly
progression of edema, erythema, infiltration of inflammatory cells, tissue necrosis, sloughing, repair by granulation, and re-epithelialization."

ADVANTAGES
Cryosurgery has the following advantages:
1. Lesions can be removed in areas where the skin is so tight or the lesion so large
that closure with sutures is impossible. Large lesions of acral lick dermatitis or
tumors on the lower portions of the leg are examples.
2. In cases in which conventional excision surgery would produce shock or excessive
blood loss, cryosurgery results in minimal hemorrhage. This is particularly effective
in old or debilitated patients. Scarring is slight, and the cosmetic effect is good.
3. Selective destruction of diseased or neoplastic skin is possible with little damage to
normal tissue. Chances of tumor cells spreading from premalignant lesions are
reduced.
4. Cryosurgery has a possible immunotherapeutic effect on malignant neoplasms.

Dermatologic Therapy • 257

DISADVANTAGES

Cryosurgery has the following disadvantages:
1. The surgeon performing cryosurgery must be experienced and needs postgraduate

training. Without specialized knowledge and skill, undesirable sequelae can result.
2. The necrosis and sloughing of frozen tissue are visually unpleasant and malodorous
for 2 to 3 weeks after cryosurgery.
3. Regrowth of depigmented, white hair on the surgery site sometimes leaves a
cosmetic defect.
4. Vital structures surrounding the frozen lesion may be damaged. This applies especially to blood vessels, nerves, tendons, ligaments, and joint capsules. For example,
in cryosurgery for multiple perianal fistulae, fecal incontinence can result if the
anal sphincter is damaged. Freezing of bone can result in pathologic fractures.
5. Large blood vessels frozen during cryosurgery for tumor removal may start bleeding 30 to 60 minutes later, when postoperative attention has been relaxed, or
several hours later when the animal is at home. Air embolism is possible if sprays
are used on open vessels.
6. Cryosurgery is contraindicated for mast cell tumors.
FREEZING AGENTS

Liquid nitrogen and nitrous oxide are the agents of choice in veterinary medicine. Carbon
dioxide and Freon have also been used, although not commonly by veterinarians.
Liquid nitrogen is the most popular freezing agent in cryosurgery. It is a clear,
colorless, odorless liquid. It is not flammable and produces a temperature of - 195.8°C
(-320SF). It can usually be obtained from the medical supply companies that sell
oxygen or from welding gas suppliers. Liquid nitrogen is delivered in variously sized
vacuum-insulated Dewar's flasks. It can easily be poured from the flask into the cryosurgical unit. When small quantities are sufficient, physicians keep liquid nitrogen in ordinary
quart insulated (Thermos) bottles that are refilled as needed by the supplier. If not
agitated, liquid nitrogen remains active in the insulated container for about 2 days. Liquid
nitrogen can be kept active for a limited time. Usually, 1 month is the maximum if the
original container is opened several times.
Nitrous oxide is the second most popular freezing agent and is most effective for
removing small tumors (less than 3 em) or for treating superficial skin lesions. It requires
cryosurgical units specifically designed for its use. Applied with probes, it produces a
temperature of - 89°C (- 138°F). Although it is more expensive on a per-unit basis than
liquid nitrogen, there is no waste and nitrous oxide is readily available in veterinary
hospitals that use gas anesthesia (halothane, nitrous oxide, and oxygen). One large tank
can be used for many months because it is usually connected directly to the unit and is
not poured, as is liquid nitrogen.
CRYOSURGICAL UNITS

Cryosurgical units deliver the freezing action by spray or probe. Some units (smaller,
hand-held bottles) are designed to spray the gas only. Other units have both spray and
probe attachments.
Some cryosurgery units deliver gas to a probe that is held against the tissue or
inserted into crevices, fistulae, or other tracts to be destroyed. Cryoprobes use the JouleThompson effect: Rapid expansion of the gas under pressure provides low freezing temperatures. This is the method used with nitrous oxide. A great variety of probes are
available, each for a different purpose. They can be round, flat, curved, pointed, or needle
sharp. A special probe has even been devised for anal sac destruction.
There is a trend toward the use of the spray units. Some units look like modified
insulated (Thermos) bottles with a spraying tip at the top. A mixture of liquid and
vaporized liquid nitrogen is sprayed directly on the area to be treated. Different spray

258 • Dennatologic Therapy

devices deliver different mixtures of liquid nitrogen, vapor, and liquid. This can vary from
15% vapor and 85% liquid to 55% vapor and 45% liquid. The higher the percentage of
liquid in the spray, the lower the temperature and the deeper the freeze.

DERMATOLOGIC INDICATIONS
Cryosurgery differs in many ways from cold steel surgery and electrosurgery. Although it
has specific uses, it is never a total replacement for conventional surgery. Proponents of
cryosurgery believe that it has an excellent place in small animal practice, but knowledge,
skill, and experience are necessary for best results. Detractors may have used the technique for the wrong conditions or without proper training, consequently experiencing poor
results or complications. Some clinicians were once enthusiastic about cryosurgery but
now use it less frequently. As improved units are manufactured, some designed especially
for veterinary surgery, the practitioner will find it easier to select the proper cryosurgical
apparatus and use it effectively.
Podkonjak reported a series of dermatologic problems treated with cryosurgery. The
success rate after one treatment was 86%, and after one or more treatments, 93%. Cases
included melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, papilloma, basal cell tumor,
hemangioma, histiocytoma, and trichoepithelioma. Also treated were follicular cysts, nonhealing ulcers, granulation tissue, proliferative tissue in the external ear canal, tail gland
hyperplasia, perianal fistulae, and circumanal adenomas.P?
• Tumors. Cryosurgery does not and should not replace conventional surgery. However, scalpel surgery is difficult or impossible to use in some situations.
• Oral Cavity. Access to the oral cavity by means of conventional surgical instruments may be difficult, and hemorrhage may be hard to control. Cryosurgery is a Simple
and more effective method of therapy. It is an alternative in treating recurrent tumors for
cases in which other surgical procedures have failed, especially for malignant neoplasms.
Oral cavity squamous cell carcinomas may respond well to cryosurgery. Gingival epulis can
be frozen, and sloughing occurs without the need for hemostasis.
• Anal Area. The main advantage of cryosurgery in managing anal tumors, especially
circumanal adenomas, is that it involves less risk of damaging the anal sphincter or the
vital anal nerve supply. In general, though, careful cold steel surgery is still the preferred
method of removing circumanal adenomas.
• Acral Lick Dennatitis. Cryosurgery is indicated in acral lick dermatitis when the
lesion is so large that the skin cannot be stretched for suturing after surgical excision. Skin
grafting has been used successfully, but only by practitioners highly skilled in plastic
surgery. It is difficult to keep dogs from damaging the grafted area because it is their
favorite place to lick. Freezing the large lick lesion destroys the thickened skin, which is
then replaced by granulation tissue that is covered by normal epithelium from the wound
margins.
Because cryosurgery temporarily deadens the sensory nerves, there is less licking and
less chance of recurrence at the same site for up to 6 months. Care must be taken not to
freeze the underlying bone. To have complete control of the depth of freezing, it is
essential to insert thermocouples under the lesion. After the lesion heals, the resulting
scar and white hair are seldom objectionable in these difficult cases. Regrettably, recurrences are the rule, usually within 6 to 12 months.
• Multiple Perianal Fistulae. Perianal fistulae may be difficult to treat, but the use
of cyclosporine is encouraging though expensive. Alternatively, favorable results have been
described using cryosurgery. This method of therapy for perianal fistulae reached a high
level of popularity in the late 1970s, but some veterinary surgeons are now returning to
the use of surgical excision. The number of lengthy cryosurgical procedures (two or more)
and the frequent recurrences of fistulae are two reasons that cryosurgery has lost favor. In
addition, the occurrence of anal strictures is high.
Anal sac removal is always recommended before cryosurgery. However, the anal sac
area is usually difficult to see because of surrounding scar and granulation tissue. Every

Dennatologic Therapy • 259

attempt must be made to avoid the complication of fecal incontinence, which can be a
greater problem.

Laser Surgery
Laser surgery is highly successful in some branches of medicine-?? and is rapidly finding a
place in veterinary dermatology. The word laser is an acronym for light amplification by
the stimulated emission of radiation. Laser light, in contrast with regular light, is characterized in three different ways. It is monochromatic, meaning it is a wavelength of one
color. It is coherent, meaning all the light waves are traveling in the same parallel
direction and in phase. It is intense, which means the number of photons delivered to a
surface area is great.
Multiple types of lasers are available and usually named for the dye or mineral used
to elicit the light, but only two are being reported with any frequency in the United
States. The argon pumped dye laser is more versatile in the wavelength of light that may
be emitted and has been used to activate the photosensitizing agents in photochemotherapy. This type of laser has limited availability at certain specialty centers. The carbon
dioxide (C02 ) laser is the most widely used type of laser in medicine worldwide. The CO 2
laser is gaining acceptance in the veterinary field, and a model for veterinarians has been
developed (Accuvet, Luxar). Its cost is low enough that some moderate- to high-volume
practices are justifying the expense.
When a laser light is directed at a tissue it is either absorbed, reflected, scattered, or
transmitted. The absorbed light is the goal, which results in transfer of energy to the
molecules in the absorbing tissue. This results in the majority of uses in the creation of
heat. The tissue destruction that results from the rapid and high heat formation is called
photothermolysis. The CO 2 laser emits a beam of light at 10,600 nm, which is the
wavelength that water maximally absorbs the light energy. Because water is a major
component of cells, they are heated and removed layer by layer. When the temperature of
the tissue rises, different effects occur. At 43° to 45°C, cells heat up and die; at 60°C,
there is protein denaturation and coagulation; at 80°C, collagen denaturation and membrane permeabilization occur; at 90° to 100°C, carbonization and tissue burning occur; and
at 100°C, vaporization and ablation occur.l" 125
In veterinary dermatology, laser therapy has been reported to be useful in removing a
variety of skin tumors, particularly of the eyelid, pinna, and tai1. 21 In some situations it
greatly speeds the time of surgery and results in improved cosmetic effect and decreased
postoperative complications (Fig. 3-3). It has been used to rapidly treat skin tumors,
especially when there are multiple lesions such as sebaceous hyperplasia/adenomas.
Laser therapy has also been reported to be helpful for certain cases of feline indolent
ulcer and eosinophilic granuloma, acral lick dermatitis, excessive granulation tissue, interdigital granulomas, onychectomy, ear canal ablation, fox tail removal, chronic stomatitis,
and interdigital abscess removal and sterilization.F' Multiple hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas from solar dermatitis are readily vaporized, allowing rapid and minimally invasive
surgery (Fig. 3-4).
Advantages of laser surgery are less pain (the nerve endings are sealed during the
cutting), less bleeding (due to sealing of small vessels and the ability to cause coagulation
by defocusing and lower power emission), and less tissue destruction. The laser light also
sterilizes the surgical incision site except for viral particles, and the surgical field can be
sterilized by defocusing the beam, an advantage in contaminated lesions such as foreign
body removal. These advantages result in less postoperative swelling and inflammation.
Disadvantages are limited to the cost of the equipment and safety requirements. The
disadvantages of the safety requirements are readily overcome with training.

Electrosurgery
Just as heat cautery was replaced by electrocautery, the latter has been improved on by
modem electrosurgery.P 177 However, electrocautery equipment is still used to destroy

260 • Dennatologic Therapy

FIGURE 3-3. Laser surgery removal of a nasal
planum, which is accomplished in 15 minutes with
minimal bleeding and postoperative pain. This cat
would eat later that day. This photograph is 6 days
after surgery.

tissue and to control hemorrhage by means of specialized tips that are heated to a bright
cherry-red, producing incandescent heat. The healing of tissue after the use of electrocautery is like that after a third-degree bum. This is not discussed further because the newest
electrosurgical units are more efficient. High-frequency electrosurgical units are capable of
cutting, cutting and coagulation, desiccation, fulguration, and coagulation. An electrosurgical unit can be extremely useful in small animal dermatology."
The main advantages of electrosurgery are (1) reduction of surgery time, (2) reduction
of total blood loss, (3) ease of coagulation when ligature application is difficult, and (4)
reduction of foreign material left in the wound. The disadvantages are (1) improper use,
leading to greater tissue damage, (2) presence of necrotic tissue within a wound, (3) delay
in wound healing, (4) reduced early tensile strength of the wound up to 40 days after
surgery, (5) decreased resistance to infection, (6) greater scar width on the skin, and (7)
inability to suture most electrosurgical wounds.

FIGURE 3-4. Removal of hemangioma in solar dermatitis by laser surgery. A, Before surgery. E, After surgery.
Vaporization can be done with no bleeding or suturing required.

Dermatologic Therapy • 26 I

The greatest practical use of electrosurgery is for the removal of small pedunculated
gingival or skin tumors. However, the procedure frequently makes histopathologic interpretation of the mass impossible. Broad-based tumors are best removed with a blade.
Next in value is hemostasis during both conventional surgery and electrosurgery. The
newest electrosurgical units generate currents that perform cutting and coagulation functions simultaneously.

MECHANISMS AND INSTRUMENTATION
Electrosurgery uses electric currents to destroy tissues selectively. Electrosurgery is possible because electric current of greater than 10,000 Hz passes through the body without
causing pain or muscle contractions, whereas the tissues and fluid of the body have
electric impedance. Low frequencies (3000 Hz) result in pain and muscle contractions. At
moderate frequencies (3000 to 5000 Hz), heat is produced, which causes tissue damage.
Heat production is directly related to the power and concentration of the current delivered, the duration of application to the tissue, and the resistance of the tissue.
With a biterminal electrosurgical unit, current passes from the unit to the active
electrode in the handpiece and through the body. The current is conducted over a large
surface area, which reduces resistance and current density, and it leaves the patient
through the (indifferent) electrode or patient ground plate and returns to the unit. This
plate should be as large as possible and covered with electrode paste or alcohol-soaked
sponges to prevent secondary heating and bums.
The waveform of the current produced by the electrosurgical unit determines the
tissue effect. Continuous, undamped sine waves are used for cutting but have poor
hemostatic qualities. Interrupted or damped sine waves have poor cutting properties but
achieve excellent hemostasis. Modulated, pulsed sine waves produce simultaneous cutting
and coagulation.
An electric unit that produces a square wave was developed. When the waves are
continuous, cutting without coagulation is possible; when the pulses of square waves are
interrupted, coagulation without cutting results; and when a combined waveform is produced, both cutting and coagulation are possible.
The currents are generated by a spark gap, by radio tubes, or by battery-operated
electrolysis machines. The machines range from inexpensive office units to high-priced
hospital models. A unit in the medium price range is practical and versatile enough for
use in most veterinary hospitals. Two main types of current are used: spark gap and
electronic currents. These are converted from ordinary 1l0-V house current by a highfrequency generator in the electrosurgical unit. In all cases, it is mandatory for the patient
to be grounded to the machine.

TECHNIQUES
• Cutting (Electroincision). Bipolar cutting current is produced in a spark gap
machine by increasing the frequency of successive wave trains.
• Cutting Without Coagulation. Of any electrosurgical method, cutting without
coagulation makes an incision with the least damage to surrounding tissue. It can be done
in relatively nonvascular tissues. When simultaneous hemostasis is needed, however, a
combination of cutting and coagulation gives the most satisfactory results.
• Desiccation. Electrodesiccation is the application of a monopolar electric current
(short spark) of high frequency and high tension to diseased or neoplastic tissue. The
tissue is dried up by the current.
In dermatology, electrodesiccation can be combined with curettage. If a biopsy is
required, the lesions can first be removed surgically by shaving the dome-shaped portion
above the skin level (shave biopsy). This can be done with a scalpel blade held parallel to
the skin or with small curved scissors with the convex surface toward the skin. The tissue
remaining below the surface is then destroyed by desiccation and removed by curettage.

262 • Dennatologic Therapy
Such electrodesiccation and curettage are especially useful for removing many sebaceous
adenomas, circumanal adenomas, fibrovascular papillomas, nevi, actinic keratoses, seborrheic keratoses, and small basal cell tumors.
• Coagulation. Electrocoagulation is used to seal small blood vessels by boiling the
vessels' endothelial cells with the current from the ball-like probe.
There are two methods of applying coagulation. One is to touch the electrode (ball)
directly to the small blood vessel until the vessel wall shrinks and the hemorrhage is
stopped by the tissue coagulation. The other method is to grasp the small blood vessel
with a hemostat, which is then touched with the electrode (a flat probe is best), and tum
on the current with the foot switch. It is important to be sure that a good seal of the
vessel is produced by either method because new hemorrhage results from insufficient
coagulation of the vessel walls.
• Fulguration. Electric fulguration is the destruction of tissue by electric sparks
generated by a high-frequency current. Direct fulguration occurs when the metal point of
the probe is connected to the uniterminal of the high-frequency unit and a spark of
electricity is directed to the tissue to be treated. Electrosurgical units capable of fulguration usually have a special probe into which the handpiece is inserted. Some units use the
same handpiece, whereas others have special fulguration handpieces that cannot be
plugged into cutting or coagulation plugs. Fulguration is used for destruction of superficial
warts and tumors. Without the need to touch the lesion, the current dehydrates and
coagulates the tissue at the same time. This tissue does not need curettage but is allowed
to slough. Most fulguration probes have a sharp point.
• Electrolysis. Electric epilation of hair can be performed with battery-operated
units or electrosurgical units that can be used at low power. The probe must be a special
tiny wire of such small diameter that it can be introduced into the hair follicle. With skill
and experience, and under magnification, epilation can be accomplished. A too-low current allows epilated hair to grow back, whereas a current that is too high or an application
that is too long can cause scarring. This method has been used for the removal of cilia in
trichiasis and distichiasis (eyelid diseases-see Chap. 19).

Radiosurgery
The next generation beyond electrosurgery is radiowave surgery or radiosurgery. This form
of surgery utilizes high-frequency radiowaves around 4 million hertz (4 MHz) and does
not require a grounding plate (Ellman Surgitron, Ellman). However, a passive electrode is
placed beneath the patient in the area of the surgery to act as an antenna to focus the
radiowaves." This plate does not require skin contact to function.
Multiple settings for different types of current allow some selection in the tissue
effects produced. Also, the power setting is variable and needs to be set so that there is
smoothest cutting with no sparking. Tissue damage is minimized when fully rectified and
fully filtered current is utilized because there is little lateral heat spread to adjacent tissue.
However, for better hemostasis, only fully rectified current may be used and will cause
coagulation as well as cutting. Partially rectified current is mainly used for coagulation and
hemostasis.
Advantages over cold steel surgery are that cutting is accomplished without pressure
being required, hemostasis with fully filtered current effectively seals vessels under 2 mm
in diameter, and the incision site and electrode tip are sterilized. Radiosurgery equipment
is available at lower costs than laser equipment. Practice is required to develop a technique that minimizes lateral tissue damage, but with experience the advantages of radiosurgery over cold steel surgery become obtainable.
Disadvantages of this type of surgery include the risk for combustion of volatile gasses
and liquids (thus alcohol is contraindicated as a prepping solution or near the antennae),
radiosurgery should not be used to cut cartilage or bone, and there is risk if this
technique is used near an unshielded pacemaker-persons or pets with such devices
should not be in the vicinity.' Smoke and an unpleasant odor may be produced, but this is

Dermatologic Therapy • 263

minimized with the use of a vacuum smoke evacuator. Tissue burning is possible, especially if the equipment is improperly used. Adequate training and practice make this a
useful surgical option.
Indications described for veterinary dermatology include cutaneous biopsy (but samples should only be taken with the fully rectified and fully filtered current) and removal of
cutaneous neoplasms. For small or pedunculated tumors, a loop electrode is available that
makes the procedure rapid .

• ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
Interest in so-called alternative therapies is increasing among pet owners. Unfortunately,
little in the way of scientific evaluation is available in the veterinary dermatology literature.
We encourage clinicians who use these modalities to design, perform, and publish meaningful clinical trials. We have so much to learn about these "natural" remedies.

Acupuncture
Acupuncture can be defined as the insertion of very fine needles into specific, predetermined points on the body to produce physiologic responses.v 153. 154 In addition to needles,
many other methods are used to stimulate acupuncture points, including acupressure,
moxibustion, cupping, applying heat or cold, ultrasound, aquapuncture, electrostimulation,
implantation, and laser use. The International Veterinary Acupuncture Society (IVAS, PO
Box 2074, Nederland, CO 80466-2074) conducts courses, seminars, and international
veterinary acupuncture congresses, and it is responsible for the accreditation of veterinary
acupuncturists throughout the world.
In dogs, acupuncture has been reported to be useful in various dermatologic conditions, especially acral lick dermatitis and other psychodermatoses.v 104, 153, 154

Holistic Medicine (Herbal Medicine, Homeopathy)
Holistic health involves the use of herbs and other natural substances. 36 , 43, 136,217 A list of
holistic veterinarians can be obtained from the American Holistic Veterinary Medical
Association (2214 Old Emmerton Road, Bel Air, MD 21015), which also publishes a
veterinary journal. We are aware of no well-designed clinical studies using this modality in
veterinary dermatology.
In Asian and some European countries, many herbal products are in routine use for
various dermatoses in humans.s- 89 Examples include Calendula (from Calendula officinalis, the marigold flower, which contains flavonoids and saponins that have anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, wound-healing properties-available in ointment or cream for
burns, diaper rash, minor wounds, leg ulcers; chamomile (from Matricaria recutita, the
daisy flower family, containing oxides, flavonoids, and matricin that inhibit cyclooxygenase,
lipoxygenase, and histamine release) - available in ointment or cream for various dermatitides, including atopic dermatitis and a 10-herb product ("decoction") taken by mouth
and shown to be effective for atopic dermatitis in double-blinded, placebo-controlled
studies. 23 , 89
There have been a number of anecdotal reports on the use of a multiaction herbal
skin gel (Phytogel, Ayuvet)." 176, 194 The product contains Pongamia glabra, Cedrus deodara, Azadirachta indica, and Eucalyptus globus. These are claimed to have antibacterial,
antifungal, antiparasitic, anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and wound-healing properties. The
product is recommended for bacterial pyoderma, dermatophytosis, scabies, demodicosis,
insect bites, acral lick dermatitis, pyotraumatic dermatitis, wounds, maggots, burns, nasal
solar dermatitis, papillomatosis, and so forth. Unfortunately, published trials are not interpretable.

264 • Dennatologic Therapy

• GENE THERAPY
Gene therapy may someday be used to treat skin diseases in companion animals. Skin
gene therapy can be defined as insertion or introduction of a desired gene into the skin in
order to express the gene product.r" The goal is to treat a specific disease process with
the protein product of the introduced gene. There are potentially large numbers of
diseases that could be treated in this manner, including diseases without a clear genetic
basis (polygenic diseases).
Generally, there are two gene therapy approaches: (1) the in vivo approach, wherein
the genes are directly introduced into the skin, and (2) the ex vivo approach, wherein
target cells (e.g., keratinocytes) are cultured from biopsy specimens, the desired gene is
inserted into the cultured cells, and the genetically modified cells are then grafted back
onto the donor. 202 Genes may be introduced by chemical (DNA transfection), physical
(microprojectiles, direct injection), or biological (retrovirus, adenovirus) techniques.

• WOUNDS
Healing
Veterinary dermatologists perfonn minor surgical procedures and manage ulcers and
other skin defects. Therefore, a basic understanding of wound healing is essential. In
addition to the discussion that follows, more in-depth information can be found in the
references.P': 47, 94, 95,184
Wound healing is divided into three overlapping series of events: (1) inflammation, (2)
new tissue formation, and (3) matrix remodeling. These stages progress along a continuum, and they may overlap considerably. An incised wound begins to heal by 5 to 8 days,
with re-establishment of epidermal continuity and a proliferation of connective tissue from
the papillary layer of the dermis. Thus, healing occurs in a "dished," or inverted, configuration until the production of underlying connective tissue pushes the epithelium up into
an everted position. (The major cell, matrix, and mediator components of wound healing
are presented in Table 3-9.)
In the inflammatory stage, the immediate reaction to a full-thickness skin loss is for
• Table 3-9
CELLS

MAJOR COMPONENTS OF WOUND HEALING
MATRIX

ENZYME CASCADES/MEDIATORS

Fibrin
Fibronectin

Hagemen factor pathways
Coagulation
Fibrinolysis
Complement

Keratinocytes
Macrophages

Fibrin
Fibronectin

Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts

Collagen Types I or III
Hyaluronic acid

PDGF
FGF
EGF
TGF-a
TGF-f3

Inflammatian

Neutrophils
Endothelial cells
Mast cells
Platelets
New Tissue Formation

Matrix Remodeling

Keratinocytes
Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts

Basement membranes
Laminin
Type IV collagen
Heparin sulfate
Type VI collagen
Chondroitin sulfate
Dermatan sulfate

TGF-f3
Collagenase
Other proteases
Glycosidases

PDCF = platelet-derived growth factor; FGF = fibroblast growth factor; EGF = epidermal growth factor; TGF = transforming
growth factor.

Dermatologic Therapy • 265

the normal elasticity of skin and muscle tension to enlarge and distort the defect. Vessels
contract and constrict for 5 to 10 minutes to limit hemorrhage to the injured area,
resulting in more widespread leakage of plasma constituents. Infiltrating neutrophils attempt to clear the area of foreign particles, especially bacteria. Peripheral blood
monocytes are progressively attracted, are activated, and become macrophages. Macrophages, like platelets, produce growth factors critical for the initiation of granulation tissue
formation. Blood vessel disruption leads to extravasation of blood constituents. Platelet
aggregation and blood coagulation initiate the early phase of inflammation. Clot formation
within vessel lumina affects hemostasis and, within the surrounding connective tissue,
provides a substrate for cell migration into the wound space. Mediators released as a
consequence of blood coagulation, complement pathways, and cell activation (or death)
cause the influx of inflammatory leukocytes and increase the permeability of undamaged
adjacent vessels.
As the inflammation progresses, the infiltrate changes from primarily neutrophils to
having large numbers of macrophages. The macrophages play an important part in the
late stages of inflammation to help with the phagocytosis, debridement, and initiation of
the changes that promote growth and granulation tissue formation. The mechanisms
dispose of microorganisms, foreign material, and devitalized tissue and set the stage for
wound repair.
The new tissue formation stage proceeds quickly when clots, necrotic tissue, and
other barriers to healing are removed from the wound. During this stage, the following
processes occur: re-epithellalization, fibroplasia and wound contraction, and neovascularization. In simple wounds, fibroblast proliferation and capillary infiltration start by the third
to the fifth day. In open wounds, evidence of these processes is recognized as granulation
tissue. Fibroblasts are most active in a wound for 14 to 21 days, and they advance along
lines of fibrin within a clot and along capillaries that are growing into a wound. At first,
the fibrin, fibroblasts, and new collagen fibers are vertically oriented in a wound, but after
about 6 days they are horizontally oriented.
The fibroblasts secrete various glycoproteins that constitute the ground substance,
aligned parallel to the surface of the wound. Collagen synthesis by the fibroblasts begins
on the fourth or fifth day, and the tiny fibrils bond together into larger fibers that become
ever stronger and less soluble. As sufficient collagen is formed, the number of fibroblasts
in the wound decreases, marking the end of the repair stage. Elastic fibers play little part
in wound repair, which explains the lack of scar elasticity.
Capillary infiltration of the healing wound is important to ensure optimal oxygen
supply for the fibroblasts. Without optimal oxygen tension, fibroblasts cannot adequately
synthesize collagen. The capillaries are a major part of the bright-red granulation tissue
that appears in open wounds 3 to 6 days after injury. In small wounds, this occurs
beneath a scab and is not visible. The proliferating capillaries form loops, or "knuckles,"
that give the wound a granular surface. The new vessels anastomose freely and differentiate progressively into arterioles and venules. Lymphatic vessels develop in a similar
manner but a little later in the healing process.
Epithelial proliferation and migration are the first obvious signs of rebuilding and
repair. Re-epithelialization of the epidermal defect begins within 24 hours after injury and
continues during granulation tissue formation. Peripheral epidermal and infundibular hair
follicle keratinocytes participate in the repair. An intense epidermal reaction occurs up to
5 mm back from the wound edge, and the number of epidermal cell layers dramatically
increases. The cells lose their firm attachment to the underlying dermis, and they flatten
and extend outward and downward over the incised dermis in a leapfrog fashion.
In simple wounds with clean, close approximation of edges, the defect may be
covered by epithelium in 24 hours. In larger wounds, granulation tissue must form before
wound epithelialization can start and the process may take days or even weeks to complete. If hair follicles are damaged, they participate in healing because the ends of the cut
follicles are deep in the dermis and closer to the depth of the wound. The new epithelium has a smooth undersurface with weak attachment to the connective tissue, so it is
easily traumatized and may be knocked from a healing wound. With the passage of time,

266 • Dennatologic Therapy
new sebaceous glands and hair follicles may regenerate by differentiation of migrating
cells.
Wound contraction is the reduction in size of an open wound as a result of centripetal movement of the whole-thickness skin that surrounds the lesion. Contraction can be
useful in loose skin because it decreases the size of the wound that must be covered
with epithelium. Over joints and in areas of tight skin, contractures can cause deformities. Contracture takes place between 5 and 45 days after injury. It is thought to
result from a pulling action by modified fibroblasts in granulation tissue that take on some
of the characteristics of smooth muscle cells. These cells are called myofibroblasts, and
they align themselves along the lines of contraction. They are also capable of producing
collagen.
The matrix remodeling stage is a period of consolidation, strengthening, and remodeling of the wound. In a fresh wound, a lag phase occurs (4 to 5 days), during which there
is little gain in wound strength. The initial strength is due to the fibrin clot, adhesive
forces of epithelialization, coagulation of protein in the wound, and ingrowth of capillaries,
fibroblasts, and collagen fibrils. The amount of collagen increases rapidly during the first 3
weeks of healing and then reaches a state of equilibrium. Over a long time, maturation
and remodeling take place by cross-linkage and changes in the physical weave of the
collagen fibers. The strength of skin and fascia increases but always remains 15% to 20%
weaker than surrounding normal tissue. All repair activity is confined to an area within
approximately 15 mm of the wound.
Initially, scar tissue is vascular and cellular and appears pink and raised. As maturation
occurs, the scar becomes white, hard, and flattened.
The following general factors are often considered to enhance or hasten wound
healing: young age, administration of anabolic steroids, administration of topical and
systemic vitamin A, ambulation of the patient, warm environment, and general good
health. Ultrasound therapy has been reported to benefit wound healing when connective
tissue is needed.F' Although it increases inflammation and delays epithelialization, it
stimulates fibroblast and collagen production and enhances vascularization of granulation
tissue.
Wound healing is stimulated by maintaining a favorable environment at the wound
site. This includes the removal of toxic exudate, maintenance of a moist but bacteria-free
environment, access to oxygen, and prevention of trauma. Much research clearly shows a
moist environment is much superior to the dry environment often created with the old
fashioned dry bandage approach to wound dressings.r" 84.193 In response to these observations on what creates a favorable environment, the pharmaceutical industry has developed
a wide variety of new wound materials that have been called interactive dreSSings .193
These interactive dressings come in several forms, such as polymeric films, polymeric
foams, in situ foams, hydrogels, hydrocolloids, and particulate and fibrous polymers.w 193
In many studies with these new wound-management materials, the healing time 50 (when
the wound will be 50% healed) is much faster but the long-term response is similar to
that with more traditional approaches. Therefore, the additional cost would seem most
appropriate in animals at greater risk for poor wound healing, such as old or debilitated
dogs and cats. As the costs for these new materials decrease, they may find a place for
routine use in veterinary medicine.
Factors that generally delay or are detrimental to wound healing, in addition to the
poor health factors mentioned earlier, include obesity and old age, steroids and steroidrelated factors, denervation, the presence of foreign bodies, infection, devitalized tissue,
dead space, insulin deficiency, hypoproteinemia, anemia, hypovolemia, malnutrition, shock,
increased catabolic rate, movement of the wound, neoplasia, tissue anoxia, radiation and
cytotoxic drugs, seromas and hematomas, edema, cold temperatures, excessive trauma, and
exposure during surgery. Nutritional deficiencies (especially of vitamins A, K, E, and C;
the B complex; and zinc) are also detrimental to wound healing.

MANAGEMENT
• Epidermal Abrasions. Margins of an abraded area are shallow and usually involve
only the epidermis. Centrally, the defect may extend into the dermis. Initially, the injury

Dennatologic Therapy • 267

fills with a blood clot and necrotic debris that dehydrate to form a scab. The epidermal
adnexa may be injured, but they remain and regenerate. In partial-thickness wounds, they
are the major source for re-epithelialization. The only care needed is initial gentle cleaning, allowing the scab to form, and protection from infection and trauma while the
epidermal cells slide under the scab to re-epithelialize the exposed dermis.
• Contaminated Wounds. The early time after a wound is called the "golden period" -an interval of about 6 hours during which prophylactic antibiotics are effective.
The first aid for wounds should involve only covering the wound with moist, dry, clean,
nonadhering material to control bleeding and to minimize contamination until definitive
care can be provided. Nearly all topical antibiotics, except bacitracin, retard experimental
wound healing/"
Proper care may require sedation or anesthesia, if allowed by the status of the
patient. Otherwise, flushing the wound with 1% lidocaine or using regional anesthesia may
be sufficient for proper wound manipulation. Prophylactic antibiotics are completely effective for only up to 3 hours after trauma; therefore, systemic agents should be given first.
One of the cephalosporins and gentamicin provide broad, effective coverage. The wound
can be filled with a water-soluble gel (such as K-Y jelly) to protect it from further
contamination while the area is prepared for surgery. Mineral oil or petroleum jelly can
be applied to clippers to cause the hair to adhere to the blades while the area is being
clipped. A vacuum is used to collect and direct debris away from the wound.
The skin is prepared with chlorhexidine surgical scrub and gently cleaned with alcohol
wipes. The clinician should then thoroughly irrigate the wound with large volumes of
sterile saline or chlorhexidine solution 0.05% to remove the gel and all foreign particles
such as hair, dirt, and clotted blood. It has been reported that 0.05% chlorhexidine can
cause a retardation of experimental wound healing,84 but the clinical significance of this in
dogs and cats is unknown.
Chlorhexidine is preferred to povidone-iodine solution because it has a wide spectrum
of antibacterial effectiveness, immediately reduces the bacterial flora, and has a residual
effect as a result of binding to the stratum corneum so tightly that it cannot be removed
with alcohol.l'" In the 0.05% dilution, it is nonirritating and does not delay healing.
Systemic absorption, toxicity, and inactivation by organic matter are not a problem. However, if the tympanic membrane is ruptured, chlorhexidine solution should be used cautiously in the external ear canal because it may cause ototoxicity.
Clay is by far the most deleterious of the soil contaminants. Pressure lavage (10 psi)
applied with an I8-gauge needle and 30-ml syringe, or 70-psi pulsating pressure lavage, as
provided with a dental water pick, may be used to decontaminate the wound. These
pressures have not been found to spread infection.
The wound can then be draped and explored for special problems. Layered debridement and sharp dissection are used to remove devitalized or severely traumatized tissue.
The wound is closed with properly placed sutures to approximate skin and to obliterate
dead spaces. Proper placement of drains, if needed, and bandaging as appropriate complete the initial treatment.
For treatment of wounds with impaired healing rates, the use of products containing
zinc oxide and cod liver oil or hydrogel-polyurethane wound dressings have been recommended.v'
• Decubital Ulcers. Debilitated, paralyzed patients have poor circulation, and their
immobility allows pressure between bony prominences and their bedding to restrict circulation further to a local tissue area. The area becomes red, and a punched-out ulcer
develops later. The ulcer may have a gray fibrous coating with surrounding necrotic tissue.
Prevention via frequent turning, gentle massage, flexion of muscles and joints, and
placing the patient on a waterbed is most important. After it has developed, the ulcer is
treated by cleaning with 0.05% chlorhexidine solution to remove necrotic tissue, pus, and
debris. The ulcer should be covered with moist occlusive bandages or a nonadherent film
and protected from pressure by "doughnut" rings or bandage rolls. Although mild antibacterial dressings are often useful initially, the application of a live yeast cell derivative and
phenylmercuric nitrate in shark liver oil (Preparation H, Whitehall) ointment increases

268 • Dennatologic Therapy
oxygen utilization and collagen formation in tissues, and it increases wound healing. It also
lubricates and protects the ulcer. When the patient becomes mobile, the ulcers heal
spontaneously.

• REFERENCES
1. Ackerman L: Nutritional supplements in canine dermatoses. Can Vet J 28:29, 1987.
2. Ackerman LJ: Dermatologic applications of radiowave
surgery (radiosurgery). Comp Cont Educ 19:463,
1997.
3. Agrawal AK: Therapeutic efficacy of a herbal gel for
skin affections in dogs. Indian Vet J 74:417, 1997.
4. Alpo Pet Center: Canine Nutrition and Feeding Management. Alpo Pet Foods, Inc., Allentown, 1984.
5. Altman S: Acupuncture therapy in small animal practice. Cornp Cont Educ 19:1233, 1997.
6. American Kennel Club: The Complete Dog Book,
17th ed. Howell House, New York, 1985.
7. Anderson BC: Aloe vera juice: A veterinary medicament? Comp Cont Educ 5:S364, 1983.
8. Andreassi L: Bioengineering of the skin. Clin Dermatol 13:289, 1995.
9. Arndt KA, et al: The pharmacology of topical therapy.
In: Fitzpatrick TB, et al (eds): Dermatology in General Medicine, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New
York, 1993, p 2837.
9a. Ashley PF, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin, and thyroid hormone concentrations in adult dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 215:11I, 1999.
10. Beale KM, et al: A study of long term administration
of FS shampoo in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:36,
1993.
11. Becheral PA, et al: CD23 mediated nitric oxide synthase pathway induction in human keratinocytes is
inhibited by retinoic acid derivatives. J Invest Dermatol 106:1182, 1996.
12. Bernstein JE, et al: Inhibition of histamine induced
pruritus by topical tricyclic antidepressants. J Am
Acad Dermatol 5:582, 1981.
13. Bojrab MJ: Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1990.
14. Bond R, Lloyd DH: A double blind comparison of
olive oil and a combination of evening primrose oil
and fish oil in the management of chronic atopy. Vet
Rec 131:558, 1992.
15. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Randomized Single-blind comparison of an evening primrose oil and fish oil combination and concentrates of these oils in the management of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 3:215, 1992.
16. Boothe DM: Topical drugs: Component interactions,
vehicles, and the consequences of alterations. Dermatol Rep 6:1, 1987.
17. Boulnois JL: Photophysical processes in recent medical laser developments: A review. Lasers in Medical
Science I. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1986, p 48.
18. Bourdeau P, Paragon BM: Alternatives aux corticoides en dermatologie des carnivores. Rev Med Vet
168:645, 1992.
19. Bourdeaux MK, et al: The effects of varying dietary
n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratios on platelet reactivity, coagulation screening assays, and antithrombin III activity
in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:235, 1997.

20. Brayton CF: Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a review.
Cornell Vet 76:61, 1986.
21. Breen PT: Lasers in dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1989, p 580.
22. Brockus CW, et al: Effect of alternate-day prednisolone administration on hypophyseal-adrenocortical activity in dogs. Am J Vet Res 60:698, 1999.
23. Brown DJ, Dattner AM: Phytotherapeutic approaches
to common dermatologic conditions. Arch Dermatol
134:1401, 1998.
24. Bruynzeel I, et al: Pentoxifylline inhibits T-cell adherence to keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 104:1004,
1995.
25. Bushby PA, et al: Microscopic tissue alterations following cryosurgery of canine skin. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 173:177, 1978.
26. Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils on
transepidermal water loss in dogs with seborrhea
sicca. In: Ihrke, PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York,
1993, p 157.
27. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of oral sunflower oil on
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentration profiles
in seborrheic dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:29, 1992.
28. Carlotti DN, Maffart P: La chlorhexidine, revue bibliographique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:553,
1996.
29. Chandraratna RAS: Rational design of receptor-selective retinoids. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(part 2):SI24,
1998.
30. Chandraratna RAS: Tazarotene: The first receptor-selective topical retinoid for the treatment of psoriasis. J
Am Acad Dermatol 37(Suppl 2, Part 3):SI2, 1997.
31. Chastain CB, Ganjam VK: Clinical Endocrinology of
Companion Animals. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia,
1986.
32. Chastain CB, Graham CL: Adrenocortical suppression
in dogs on daily and alternate day prednisolone administration. Am J Vet Res 40:936, 1979.
33. Chew BP, et al: Importance of B-carotene nutrition in
dog and cat: Uptake and immunity. In: Reinhart GA,
Carey DP (eds): Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition II. Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington,
OH, 1998, P 513.
34. Clark RAF: Cutaneous wound repair. In: Goldsmith
LA (ed): Physiology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology of the Skin II. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1991.
35. Clark TP: Pharmacodynamics drug.action and interaction. In: Dowling PM, et al (eds): Clinical Pharmacology: Principles and Practice. Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, 1998, p .5.
36. Climer J: Herbal medicine. Cat Fancy, June 1990,
p 36.
37. Cohn LA: Glucocorticoids as immunosuppressive
agents. Semin Vet Med Surg 12:150, 1997.
38. Croxtall JD, et al: Lipocortin 1 and the control of
cPLA2 activity in A459 cells: Glucocorticoids block

Dennatologic Therapy • 269
EGF stimulation of cPLA2 phosphorylation. Biochem
Pharmacol 52:351, 1996.
39. Culbert LA, et aI: Complications associated with highdose prednisolone sodium succinate therapy in dogs
with neurological injury. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:
129, 1998.
39a. Dahlinger J, et aI: Effect of ketoconazole on cyclosporine dose in healthy dogs. Vet Surg 27:64, 1998.
40. Davis JA, et aI: Benzocaine-induced methemoglobinemia attributed to topical application of the anesthetic
in several laboratory animal species. Am J Vet Res 54:
1322, 1993.
41. DeBoer DJ, et aI: Inability of short-duration treatment with a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor to reduce clinical
signs of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 5:13, I994.
42. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Inability of topical treatment to influence the course of experimental feline
dermatophytosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:439, 1995.
43. De-Hui S, et aI: Manual of Dermatology in Chinese
Medicine. Eastland Press, Seattle, 1995.
43a. Draelos ZD: New developments in cosmetics and
skin care products. Adv DermatoI12:3, 1997.
44. Drake LA, et aI: Guidelines of care for the use of
topical glucocorticoids. J Am Acad Dermatol 35:615,
1996.
45. Duvic M, et aI: Molecular mechanisms of tazarotene
action in psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 37(Suppl 2,
Part 3):S18, 1997.
46. duVivier A, Stoughton RB: Tachyphylaxis to the action of topically applied corticosteroids. Arch Dermatol 111:581, 1975.
47. Dyson M: Advances in wound healing physiology:
The comparative perspective. Vet Dermatol 8:227,
1997.
48. Ellis CN, Voorhees JJ: Etretinate therapy. J Am Acad
Dermatol 16:267, 1987.
49. Elson ML: The role of retinoids in wound healing. J
Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S79, 1998.
50. Evans AG, et aI: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
treatment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
2553, 1985.
51. Fadok VA: Nutritional therapy in veterinary dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
IX. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 591.
52. Fadok VA: Treatment of canine idiopathic seborrhea
with isotretinoin. Am J Vet Res 47:1730, 1986.
53. Fledman RJ, Maibach HI: Regional variation in percutaneous penetration of C14 cortisol in man. J Invest DermatoI48:181, 1967.
54. Franz TJ: Kinetics of cutaneous drug penetration. Int
J Dermatol 22:499, 1983.
55. Garcia G, et aI: Inhibition of histamine release from
dispersed canine skin mast cells by cyclosporine A,
rolipram and salbutamol but not dexamethasone or
sodium cromoglylate. Vet Dermatol 9:81, 1998.
56. Glaze MR, et aI: Ophthalmic corticosteroid therapy:
Systemic effects in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
192:73, 1988.
57. Goette DK, Odom RB: Adverse effects of corticosteroids. Cutis 23:477, 1979.
58. Goldsmith LA: Propylene glycol. Int J Dermatol 17:
703, 1978.
59. Goldyne ME: Leukotrienes: Clinical significance. J
Am Acad Dermatol 10:659, 1984.
60. Granlund H, et aI: Long-term follow-up of eczema
patients treated with cyclosporine. Acta Dermatol Venereol 78:40, 1998.

61. Greene JA, Knecht CD: Electrosurgery: A review.
Vet Surg 9:327, 1980.
62. Gregory CR, et al: Response to isoantigens and mitogens in the cat: Effects of cyclosporine A. Am J Vet
Res 48:126, 1987.
63. Grier RL, et aI: Hyperthermic treatment of superficial tumors in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 177:227,
1980.
64. Griffin CEo Canine atopic disease. In: Griffin CE, et
aI (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 99.
65. Griffin CEo Open forum-Etretinate-How is it being used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialog
Spring-Summer, 1993.
66. Griffin CE: Systemic glucocorticoid therapy in veterinary medicine. Presentation at the American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology, New Orleans,
March, 1986.
67. Griffin CEo Unpublished observations.
68. Gross TL, et aI: Subepidermal bullous dermatosis due
to topical corticosteroid therapy in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:127, 1997.
69. Cuaguere E, et aI: Efficacite c1inique de la methylprednisolone dans Ie traitement symptomatique des
dermatoses allergiques du chien. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 31:171, 1996.
70. Gyrd-Hansen N, et aI: Percutaneous absorption of
organophosphorus insecticides in pigs-The influence
of different vehicles. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 16:174,
1993.
71. Hargis AM, Mundel AC: Familial canine dermatomyositis. Comp Contin Educ 14:855, 1992.
72. Hall JA, et aI: Effect of dietary n-6-to-n-3 fatty acid
ratio on complete blood and total white blood cell
counts, and T-cell subpopulations in aged dogs. Am J
Vet Res 60:319, 1999.
73. Harvey RG: A comparison of evening primrose oil
and sunflower oil for the management of papulocrustous dermatitis in cats. Vet Rec 133:571, 1993.
74. Harvey RG: Effect of varying proportions of evening
primrose oil and fish oil on cats with crusting dermatosis ("miliary dermatitis"). Vet Rec 133:208, 1993.
75. Harvey RG: Management of feline miliary dermatitis
by supplementing the diet with essential fatty acids.
Vet Rec 128:326, 1991.
76. Helgren JA: Splish splash. Cat Fancy, May 1991,
p 32.
77. Humphreys F, Shuster S: The effect of topical dimethindene maleate on wheal reactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol 23:234, 1987.
78. Jeffers JG: Diabetes mellitus induced in a dog after
administration of costicosteroids and methylprednisolone pulse therapy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:77,
1991.
79. Kannon GA, Garrett AB: Moist wound healing with
occlusive dressings: A clinical review. Dermatol Surg
21:583, 1995.
80. Kelly L: Veterinary technician in EXXON Valdez
cleanup. Personal communication, 1998.
81. Kemppainen RJ, et aI: Adrenocortical suppression in
the dog after a single dose of methylprednisolone
acetate. Am J Vet Res 42:822, 1981.
82. Kemppainen RJ, et aI: Adrenocortical suppression in
the dog given a Single intramuscular dose of prednisone or triamcinolone acetonide. Am J Vet Res 42:
204, 1982.
83. Kemppainen RJ: Principles of glucocorticoid therapy
in nonendocrine disease. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current

270 • Dennatologic Therapy
Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 954.
84. Kietzmann M: Improvement and retardation of
wound healing: Effects of pharmacological agents in
laboratory animal studies. Vet Dermatol 10:83, 1999.
85. Kietzmann M, et al: Untersuchungen Zur Vertraglichkeit, Wirkung im epidennalen Stoffwechsel und
Metabolisierung von Benzoylperoxid beim Hund.
Kleinterpraxis 35:31, 1990.
86. Kinnunen T, Koskela M: Antibacterial and antifungal
properties of propylene glycol, kexylene glycol, and
1,3-butylene glycol in vitro. Acta Dermatol Venereol
71:148, 1991.
87. Kobay MJ, and Jones BR: Local current yield radiofrequency hyperthermia for the treatment of superficial skin tumors in cats. N Z Vet J 31:173, 1983.
88. Koch HJ, Vercelli A: Workshop report 3: Shampoos
and other topical therapies. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 409.
89. Koo J, Arain S: Traditional Chinese medicine for the
treatment of dermatologic disorders. Arch Dermatol
134:1388, 1998.
89a. Koo J, et al: Advances in psoriasis therapy. Adv Dermatol 12:47, 1997.
90. Kwochka KW: Retinoids and vitamin A therapy. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 203.
91. Kwochka KW: Symptomatic topical therapy of scaling
disorders. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
P 191.
92. Kwochka KW, Kowalski JS: Prophylactic efficacy of
four antibacterial shampoos against Staphylococcus intermedius in dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:115, 1991.
93. Latimer KS, et 'II: Effects of cyclosporin A administration in cats. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 11:161,
1986.
94. Lees MJ, et al: Factors influencing wound healing:
Lessons from military wound management. Comp
Contin Educ 11:8550, 1989.
95. Lees MJ, et al: Second-intention wound healing.
Comp Contin Educ 11:857, 1989.
96. Levine N: Role of retinoids in skin cancer treatment
and prevention. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S62,
1998.
97. Lichtenstein J, et al: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs: Their use in dermatology. Int J Dermatol 26:
80, 1987.
98. Lim KK, et al: Cyclosporine in the treatment of dermatologic disease: An update. Mayo Clin Proc 71:
1183, 1996.
99. Lin AN, et al: Sulfur revisited. J Am Acad Dermatol
18:553, 1988.
100. Lloyd DH, Thomsett LR: Essential fatty acid supplementation in the treatment of canine atopy: A preliminary study. Vet Dermatol 1:41, 1989.
101. Lloyd DH: Essential fatty acids and skin disease. J
Small Anim Pract 30:207, 1989.
102. Lober CW: Canthaxanthin: The "tanning" pill. J Am
Acad Dermatol 13:660, 1985.
103. Logas D, Kunkle GA: Double-blinded crossover study
with marine oil supplementation containing high-dose
eicosapentaenoic acid for the treatment of canine
pruritic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 5:99, 1994.
104. Looney AL, Rothstein E: Use of acupuncture to treat
psychodermatosis in the dog. Canine Pract 23(5):18,
1998.

105. Maibach HI, Stoughton RB: Topical corticosteroids.
Med Clin North Am 57:1253, 1973.
106. Manglesdorf DJ, et al: The retinoid receptors. In:
Span HG, et al (eds): The Retinoids: Biology, Chemistry, and Medicine. New York, Raven Press, 1994,
p 319.
107. Marks R: Pharmacokinetics and safety review of tazarotene. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 2):5134, 1998.
108. Marks SL, Song MD, et al: Clinical evaluation of
etretinate for the treamtent of canine solar induced
squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions. J
Am Acad DennatoI27:11, 1992.
109. Marsella R, et al: Use of pentoxifylltne in the treatment of allergic contact reactions to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
1997.
110. Mason KV: Clinical and pathophysiologic aspects of
parasitic skin diseases. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p 177.
111. Mason KV, Atwell R: Clinical efficacy trials on a
chlorhexidine/miconazole shampoo for the treatment
of seborrheic dermatitis associated with an overgrowth of Malassezia pachydermatis and coccoid bacteria. Proc Eur Soc Vet Derrnatol 12:222, 1995.
112. Mathews KA, et 'II: CycIosporine treatment of perianal fistulas in dogs. Can Vet J 38:39, 1997.
113. Mathews KA, Sukhiani HR: Randomized controlled
trial of cycIosporine for treatment of perianal fistulas
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1249, 1997.
114. McColl C: Oral presentation. In: Proceedings of the
American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology,
American College of Veterinary Dermatology, San
Antonio, 1998.
115. McDonough S: Grooming. In: Kunkle GA (ed): Feline Dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 25:767, 1995.
116. Miller D: Know How to Groom Your Dog. Pet Library Ltd., New York, 1990.
117. Miller WH, Jr: Fatty acid supplements as anti-inflammatory agents. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p
563.
118. Miller WH Jr: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
in the management of canine and feline pruritus. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 566.
119. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Medical management of
chronic pruritus. Comp Contin Educ 16:449, 1994.
120. Miller WH Jr, et al: Efficacy of DVM Derm Caps
Liquid in the management of allergic and inflammatory dermatoses of the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
29:37, 1993.
121. Miller WH Jr, et al: Investigation on the antipruritic
effects of ascorbic acid given alone and in combination with a fatty acid supplement to dogs with allergic
skin disease. Canine Pract 17(5):11, 1992.
122. Moriello KA, et al: Adrenocortical suppression associated with topical otic administration of glucocorticoids
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:329, 1988.
123. Mukhtar H, et al: Green tea and skin: Anticarcinogenic effects. J Invest Dermatol 102:3, 1994.
124. Mulnix JA: Corticosteroid therapy in the dog. In: Proceedings of the American Animal Hospital Association
Annual Meeting, Boston, 1977.
125. Nelson JS, Berns MW: Basic laser physics and tissue
interactions. Contemp Dermatol 2:3, 1998.
126. Northway RB: Experimental use of aloe vera extract

Dennatologic Therapy' 271
in clinical practice. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 71:196,
1975.
127. Noxon JO, et al: Minimal inhibitory concentration of
silver sulfadiazine on Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus intermedius isolates from the ears of
dogs with otitis externa. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Am Coli Vet DermatoI13:72, 1997.
128. Olivry T: Personal communication, 1999.
129. Page EH, et al: Cyclosporine A. J Am Acad Dermatol
14:785, 1986.
130. Paradis M: Canine recurrent flank alopecia: Treatment with melatonin. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Am Coli Vet Dermatolll:49, 1995.
131. Paradis M: Melatonin in the treatment of canine pattern baldness. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 511.
132. Paradis M: Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In:
Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIIl. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 546.
133. Pathak MA: Sunscreens, topical and systemic approaches for protection of human skin against harmful effects of solar radiation. J Am Acad Dermatol 7:
285, 1982.
134. Peaston AE, et al: Photodynamic therapy for nasal
and aural squamous cell carcinoma in cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 202:1261, 1993.
135. Peck GL, DiGiovanna JJ: The retinoids. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999,
p 2810.
135a. Pedersen NC: A review of immunologic diseases in
the dog. Vet Immunol ImmunopathoI69:251, 1999.
136. Pitcairn R: Dr. Pitcairn's Complete Guide to Natural
Health for Dogs and Cats. Rodale Press, Inc, New
York, 1995.
137. Podkonjak KR: Veterinary cryotherapy-2. Vet Med
(Small Animal Clinician) 77:183, 1982
138. Poppenga RH, et al: Hexachlorophene toxicosis in a
litter of Doberman pinschers. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:
129, 1990.
139. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20:1525, 1990.
140. Power HT: Personal communication.
140a. Rees C: Pentoxifylline (Trental). Derm Dialogue,
Winter, p 10, 1999.
141. Rewerts JM, et al: Atraumatic rupture of the gastrocnemius after corticosteroid administration in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:655, 1997.
142. Rickards RA: A new treatment for canine melanosis.
Mod Vet Pract 47:38, 1966.
143. Rinkardt NE, et al: The effects of prednisone and
azathioprine on circulating immunoglobulin levels and
lymphocyte subpopulations in normal dogs. Can J Vet
Res 63:18, 1999.
143a. Rosenbaum M: Cyclosporine. Derm Dialogue, Summer, p 5, 1999.
143b. Rohrer CR, et al: Gastric hemorrhage in dogs given
high doses of methylprednisolone sodium succinate.
Am J Vet Res 60:977, 1999.
143c. Rohrer CR, et al: Efficacy of misoprostol in prevention of gastric hemorrhage in dogs treated with high
doses of methylprednisolone sodium succinate. Am J
Vet Res 60:982, 1999.
144. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Clinical evaluation of cyclosporine in animal models with cutaneous immune-

mediated disease and epitheliotropic lymphoma. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 25:377, 1989.
145. Rosenkrantz W: Immunomodulating drugs in dermatology. In: Current Veterinary Therapy X: Small Animal Practice. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989,
p 570.
145a. Ruszczak Z, Schwartz RA: Interferons in dermatology. Adv DermatoI13:235, 1998.
146. Salzberg K: Tools and techniques for home grooming.
Cat Fancy, May 1994, p 48.
147. Samlaska CP, et al: Pentoxifylline. J Am Acad Dermatol, 30:603, 1994.
148. Saunders B: How to Trim, Groom, and Show Your
Dog. Howell House, New York, 1967.
148a. Scardino MS, et al: The effects of omega-3 fatty acid
diet enrichment on wound healing. Vet Dermatol 10:
283, 1999.
149. Schaer M, Ginn PE: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
and steroid hepatopathy in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:48, 1999.
150. Schauder S, Ippen H: Photodermatoses and light protection. Int J Dermatol 21:241, 1982.
151. Schick RO, et al: Efficacy of an omega-3 fatty acid
adjusted diet in pruritic dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 12:245, 1995.
152. Schleimer RP: Glucocorticosteroids. In: Middleton E,
et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice. Mosby
Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
153. Schoen AM: Problems in Veterinary Medicine: Veterinary Acupuncture. J.B. Lippincott, Philadelphia,
1992.
154. Schoen AM: Veterinary Acupuncture: Ancient Art to
Modem Medicine. American Veterinary Publications,
Goleta, California, 1994.
155. Schwartz E, et al: In vivo prevention of corticosteroid-induced skin atrophy by tretinoin in the hairless
mouse is accompanied by modulation of collagen, glycosaminoglycans, and fibronectin. J Invest Dermatol
102:241, 1994.
156. Schwartzman RM: Topical dermatologic therapy. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1977, p 506.
156a. Schwassman M: Uses of interferon. Derm Dialogue,
Winter, p 9, 1999.
157. Scott DW: Clinical assessment of topical benzoyl peroxide in treatment of canine skin diseases. Vet Med
(Small Animal Clinician) 74:808, 1979.
158. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
159. Scott DW: Hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 9:3, 1979.
160. Scott DW: Rational use of glucocorticoids in dermatology. In: Bonagura J (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XII. W.E. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
161. Scott DW: Systemic glucocorticoid therapy. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 988.
162. Scott DW: Topical cutaneous medicine, or "Now
what should I try?" Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46:89,
1979.
163. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine pruritus. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:425, 1988.
164. Scott DW, Cayatte SM: Failure of papaverine hydrochloride and doxycycline hyclate as antipruritic agents
in pruritic dogs: Results of an open clinical trial. Can
Vet J 34:164, 1993.
165. Scott DW, Green CEo Iatrogenic secondary adreno-

272 • Dermatologic Therapy
cortical insufficiency in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
10:555, 1974.
166. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Medical management of
allergic pruritus in the cat, with emphasis on feline
atopy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:103, 1993.
167. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine allergic pruritus. J S Mr Vet Assoc 64:52, 1993.
168. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the effect of two
commercial veterinary benzoyl peroxide shampoos in
dogs. Canine Pract 19:7, 1994.
169. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the efficacy of
two commercial veterinary emollients (Micro Pearls
and Humilac) in the management of winter-time dry
skin in dogs. Cornell Vet 81:419, 1991.
170. Scott DW, et al: Comparison of the clinical efficacy
of two commercial fatty acid supplements (EfaVet
and DVM Derm Caps), evening primrose oil, and
cold water marine fish oil in the management of allergic pruritus in dogs: A double-blinded study. Cornell
Vet 82:319, 1992.
171. Scott DW, et al: Effect of an omega-3/omega-6 fatty
acid containing commercial lamb and rice diet on
pruritus in atopic dogs: Results of a single-blinded
study. Can J Vet Res 61:145, 1997.
172. Scott DW, et al (eds): Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
173. Scott DW, et al: Observations on the immunopathology and therapy of canine pemphigus and pemphigoid. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:48, 1982.
173a. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the efficacy of
two commercial veterinary pramoxine cream rinses in
the management of pruritus in atopic dogs. Canine
Pract 25:15, 2000.
174. Shelton RM: Aloe vera: Its chemical and therapeutic
properties. Int J Dermatol 30:679, 1991.
175. Shroot B: Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
of topical adapalene. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):
S17, 1998.
176. Silver RJ, et al: Multi-center clinical evaluation of an
ayurvedic topical herbal formulation for veterinary
dermatopathies. J Am Holistic Vet Med Assoc 17:33,
1998.
177. Slatter DH (ed): Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1993.
178. Song M: Fleas and Flea Control. The Professional
Library Series. AAHA, Denver, CO, 1993.
179. Spicer MS, Goldberg DJ: Lasers in dermatology. J
Am Acad Dermatol 34:1, 1996.
180. Stewart LJ, et al: Isotretinoin in the treatment of
sebaceous adenitis in two Vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:65, 1991.
181. Storrs FJ: Use and abuse of systemic corticosteroid
therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1:95, 1979.
182. Surber C, et al: Topical corticosteroids. J Am Acad
Dermatol 32:1025, 1995.
183. Swaim SF: Advances in wound healing in small animal practice: Current status and lines of development. Vet Dermatol 8:249, 1997.
184. Swaim SF: Surgery of Traumatized Skin: Management and Reconstruction in the Dog and Cat. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980.
185. Swaim SF, Lee AH: Topical wound medications: A
review. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1588, 1987.
186. Tarvin G, Lenehan T: Personal communication, 1993.
187. Thoma RE, et al: Phototherapy: A promising cancer

therapy. Vet. Med. (Small Animal Clinician) 78:1693,
1983.
188. Thomas ML: Development of a bacterial model for
canine otitis externa. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 6:28,
1990.
189. Thomas RC, et al: Effects of a 1% hydrocortisone
conditioner on haematological and biochemical parameters, adrenal function testing and cutaneous reactivity to histamine in normal and pruritic dogs. Vet
Dermatol1O:109, 1999.
190. Toyoda M, Morohashi M: Morphological assessment
of the effects of cyclosporine A on mast cell-nerve
relationship in atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol Venerol 78:321, 1998.
191. Trettien A: Workshop Report 13: Shampoos and
other topical therapy. In: Von Tscharner C, Halliwell
REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol
1. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 434.
192. Turek
Hayek MG: Effect of omega-6/omega-3
fatty acid ratios on cytokine production in adult and
geriatric dogs. In: Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition II.
Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington, 1998, p 305.
193. Turner TD: Interaction dressings used in the management of human soft tissue injuries and their potential
in veterinary practice. Vet Dermatol 8:235, 1997.
194. Uthappa D, Sharma BN: Clinical efficacy of a herbal
gel for skin disorders in dogs. Indian Vet J 20:231,
1996.
195. Vaden SL: Cyclosporine and tacrolimus. Semin Vet
Med Surg 12:161, 1997.
196. Vanden Broek AHM, Stafford WL: Epidermal and
hepatic glucocorticoid receptors in cats and dogs. Res
Vet Sci 52:312, 1992.
197. Vaughan C, et al: Photoinstability of UVA sun protection products. Am J Cosmetic Surg 14:1423, 1997.
198. Vaughn DM, et al: Evaluation of dietary n-6 to n-3
fatty acid ratios on leukotriene B synthesis in dog skin
and neutrophils. Vet DermatoI5:163, 1994.
199. Verheijen F, et al: Adrenocortical suppression in dogs
and rats after topical administration of betamethasone-17-valerate and resocortol butyrate. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 481.
200. Villar D, et al: Toxicity of melaleuca oil and related
essential oils applied topically on dogs and cats. Vet
Hum Toxicol 36:139, 1994.
201. Vitale CB, et al: Diet-induced alterations in lipid metabolism and associated cutaneous xanthoma formation in 5 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 241.
202. Vogel JC, et al: Gene therapy for skin diseases. Adv
Dermatol 11:383, 1996.
203. Webster GF: Topical tretinoin in acne therapy. J Am
Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S38, 1998.
204. Weiss JS, Shavin JS: Adapalene for the treatment of
acne vulgaris, J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S50,
1998.
205. Werth VP, Lazarus GS: Systemic glucocorticoids. In:
Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999, p 2783.
206. Wester RC, et al: Controlled release of benzoyl peroxide from a porous microsphere polymeric system
can reduce topical irritancy. J Am Acad Dermatol 24:
720, 1991.

n,

Dermatologic Therapy • 273
207. Wiegand UW, Chou RC: Pharmacokinetics of oral
isotretinoin. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):S8,
1998.
208. Wiegand UW, Chou RC: Pharmacokinetics of acitretin and etretinate. J Am Acad Dermatol 39(Part 3):
S25, 1998.
209. Withrow SJ (ed): Symposium on ctyosurgety. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 10:753, 1980.
209a. White GM: Acne therapy. Adv Dermatol 14:29,
1999.
210. White JV: Cycylosporin: Prototype of a T-cell selective immunosuppressant. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:
566, 1986.
211. White P: Essential fatty acids: Use in management of
canine atopy. Comp Contin Educ 15:451, 1993.
212. White SD, et al: Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone
sodium succinate) pulse therapy in five dogs with autoimmune skin disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:
1121, 1987.
213. White SD, et al: Isotretinoin and etretinate in the
treatment of benign and malignant cutaneous neoplasia and in sebaceous adenitis of longhaired dogs. Proc

Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 7:101, 1991.
214. White SD, et al: Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and results of treatment with isotretinoin and etretinate: 30
cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:197,
1995.
215. White-Weithers N, Medleau L: Evaluation of topical
therapies for the treatment of dermatophyte-infected
hair from dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
250, 1995.
216. Wilkie DA, Kirby R: Methemoglobinemia associated
with dermal application of benzocaine cream in a cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:85, 1988.
217. Winter WG: The Holistic Veterinary Handbook.
Galde Press, Lakeville, MN, 1997.
218. Wolf R: Soaps, shampoos, and detergents: A scientific
soap opera. Clin Dermatol 14:1, 1996.
219. Yosipovitch G, Maibach HI: Effect of pramoxine on
experimentally induced pruritus in humans. J Am
Acad Dermatol 37:278, 1997.
220. Zenoble RD, Kemppaainen RJ: Adrenocortical suppression by topically applied corticosteroids in healthy
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:685, 1987.

Chapter

4
Bacterial Skin Diseases

• CUTANEOUS BACTERIOLOGY AND NORMAL
DEFENSE MECHANISMS
The skin forms a protective barrier without which life would be impossible. The defense
has three components: physical, chemical, and microbial.P" 173. 237
Hair forms the first line of physical defense to protect against the contact of pathogens with the skin. Hair may also harbor bacteria, especially staphylococci, 6. 64, 125. 128. 278
However, the relatively inert stratum corneum forms the basic physical defense layer, Its
tightly packed keratinized cells are permeated by an emulsion of sebum, sweat, and
intercellular cement substance. The emulsion is concentrated in the outer layers of keratin, where some of the volatile fatty acids vaporize, leaving a fairly impermeable superficial
sebaceous crust. 27• 172, 183, 194, 242 Together, the cells and the emulsion function as an
effective physical barrier. The emulsion provides a chemical barrier to potential pathogens
in addition to its physical properties. Fatty acids, especially linoleic acid, have potent
antibacterial properties. Water-soluble substances in the emulsion include inorganic salts
and proteins that inhibit bacteria.
The skin is viewed as an immune organ that plays an active role in the induction and
maintenance of immune responses, which can be beneficial or detrimental.P? Specific
components include epidermal Langerhans' cells, dermal dendrocytes, keratinocytes, skinseeking T lymphocytes, mast cells, and the endothelium of postcapillary venules, Various
cytokines, complement, and immunoglobulins IgA, IgG, IgGj, IgG 2a , IgG2b , IgG 2C' IgM,
and IgE are found in the emulsion layer and contribute to the skin's immunologic
function.Fv 173,245,290 Many individual components of this complicated system have antimicrobial effects, so the normal skin should be viewed as an organ that is resistant to
infection.
The normal skin microflora also contributes to skin defense mechanisms. Bacteria are
located in the superficial epidermis and in the infundibulum of the hair follicles, where
sweat and sebum provide nutrients.F's 252. 253 The normal flora is a mixture of bacteria that
live in symbiosis, probably exchanging growth factors. The flora may change with different
cutaneous environments. These are affected by factors such as heat, pH, salinity, moisture,
albumin level, and fatty acid leve1. 56 , 124, 192 The close relationship between the host and
the microorganisms enables bacteria to occupy microbial niches and to inhibit colonization
by invading organisms. In addition, many bacteria (Bacillus spp., Streptococcus spp., and
Staphylococcus spp.) are capable of producing antibiotic substances, and some bacteria
can produce enzymes (e.g., 13-lactamase) that inhibit antibiotics.v"
Bacteria cultured from normal skin are called normal inhabitants and are classified as
resident or transient, depending on their ability to multiply in that habitat. 158, 160 Residents
successfully multiply on normal skin. A variety of studies have been performed to identity
the normal flora of the skin of dogs and cats. Site and temporal variation have been
observed, but differences in methodology make direct comparison of the various studies
difficult. In general, most studies report the following findings on resident and transient
organisms.

274

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 275

Resident Organisms
Micrococcus spp.; coagulase-negative staphylococci, especially Staphylococcus epidermidis
and S. xylosus; a-hemolytic streptococci; Clostridium spp.; Propionibacterium acnes; Acinetobacter spp.; and various gram-negative aerobes are considered normal residents of the
surface of dog skin. 3. 63, 121, 125,242,288 Hair shafts and hair follicles appear to have their own
bacterial flora. Micrococcus spp., gram-negative aerobes, Bacillus spp., and Staphylococcus
intermedius are found on normal hairs. l 25 The staphylococci are found distally, whereas
the gram-negative organisms are found more proximally.l'" Micrococcus spp., Propionibacterium acne, streptococci, Bacillus spp., and S. intermedius are found in the hair follicle.
In the past, there was debate as to whether S. intermedius belonged in the list of
resident or transient flora." 7, 176 Today, we know that dogs can harbor multiple different
strains of S. intermedius on their body. 109, 125, 241, 242 Probably, one or more of these strains
(e.g., the follicular population) should be considered a resident.
In dogs, S. intermedius can be cultured at high frequency from the nares, oropharynx,
and anal ring of normal and infected dogs. 8, 86, 123, 241 It is thought to be part of the
resident flora of these regions. From these sites, it can be spread to other regions of the
body (e.g., hair shafts, to sites of infection, to other dogs in the household, and to contact
humans) .109, 123. 128 If the mucosal population is eliminated with topical antibiotics, the
cutaneous population drops markedly.F" These data suggest that S. intermedius be considered a part of the transient flora of the dog's skin.t 25, 192
The dog's resident staphylococcal flora appears to be acquired from its dam in the
neonatal period." The number of organisms at anyone body site vary regionally, with
moist areas (chin, interdigital web, and abdomen) typically more heavily colonized.
The resident flora of cats includes Micrococcus spp.; coagulase-negative staphylococci,
especially Staphylococcus simulans; a-hemolytic streptococci; and Acinetobacter Spp.197, 248
In one study, 50% of the cultures were negative. 160 Coagulase-positive staphylococci,
including both Staphylococcus aureus and S. intermedius, are also commonly isolated from
normal skin and should be considered residents.v- 85, 198 Household cats have a higher
frequency of isolation of coagulase-negative (Staphylococcus capitis, S. epidermidis, Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus sciuri, and Staphylococcus
wameri) and coagulase-positive (S. aureus and S. intermedius) organisms compared with
the case in cattery cats, suggesting that these organisms may be transferred from humans.

Transient Organisms
Transient organisms may be cultured from the skin but are of no significance unless they
become involved in a pathologic process as secondary invaders. These organisms do not
multiply on the normal skin of most animals. Transients of the dog include Escherichia
coli, Proteus mirabilis, Corynebacterium spp., Bacillus spp., and Pseudomonas spp.,
whereas /3-hemolytic streptococci, E. coli, P. mirabilis, Pseudomonas spp., Alcaligenes spp.,
Bacillus spp., Staphylococcus spp. (coagulase-positive), and Staphylococcus spp. (coagulasenegative other than S. simulans) are found in the cat.
The primary cutaneous pathogen of dogs, and probably cats, is S. intermedius, a
coagulase-positive species. DNA fingerprinting of different isolates shows that, although all
isolates share a Significant identity, there are many different strains of S. intermedius.
Multiple different strains can be found on the same individual. 109, 130, 259 Isolates from
normal or infected dogs produce a variety of substances, including the enterotoxins (A, B,
C, D), toxic shock protein, protein A, and the hemolysins.w 101, 124 Exfoliative toxin,
frequently isolated from S. aureus and Staphylococcus hyicus, is not produced by S.
intermedius. 131 The toxins, especially protein A and enterotoxin C, influence bacterial
binding by up regulating adhesion molecules on keratinocytes but appear to influence the
host most by acting as superantigens that up regulate the local cutaneous and immunologic
response.w 124, 188 Some strains of S. intermedius produce slime that encapsulates
the bacterium, inhibiting its ability to be phagocytized and increasing its ability to adhere.P! 192

276 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
There has been speculation about the means by which only a small number of a vast
array of bacteria in the environment are able to colonize or infect the skin. The potent
cleaning forces of dilution, washout, drying, and desquamation of surface cells prevent
many organisms from colonizing the skin. It is now recognized that bacterial adhesion is a
prerequisite to colonization and infection. 103, 183, 237, 240 Bacterial adhesion is a complex
process influenced by both the host and the organism. Bacteria possess surface adhesion
molecules, which influence their ability to bind to keratinocytes. For staphylococci, teichoic acid and protein A appear to be most important surface adhesion molecules.P'
These molecules bind to host surface receptors (e.g., fibronectin and vitronectin) to
prevent the bacteria from being brushed from the skin.
Adhesion is increased with increasing time, temperature, and concentration of bacteria
as well as in certain diseases. 16. 26. 27, 126 In hyperproliferative disorders (e.g., seborrhea
complex), more bacteria adhere to the skin because more binding sites are available. Some
atopic dogs bind more bacteria, which could increase the likelihood of infection. However,
an increased binding ability does not equate with increased pathogenicity or virulence. To
date, a specific virulence factor for S. intermedius has not been identified.t" 195,240,242
Other organisms from the transient group are pathogenic in rare cases.F' 87, 179, 233
Gram-negative organisms tend to flourish in moist, warm areas and to predominate when
medications depress the gram-positive flora.192, 242 Cats infrequently experience pyoderma
but commonly have subcutaneous abscesses. Because these are often from bite wounds,
the mouth flora of the cat is an important factor. It includes Pasteurella multocida,
/3-hemolytic streptococci, Corynebacterium spp., Actinomyces spp., Bacteroides spp., and
Fusobacterium spp. Staphylococcus felis is increasingly isolated from cats with otitis extema, subcutaneous abscesses, paronychia, and other skin infections.v 140
Anaerobic bacteria are usually abundant in gastrointestinal secretions; therefore, fecal
contamination is a cause of soft tissue infections due to these organisms. Anaerobic
bacteria isolated from dog and cat infections include Actinomyces spp., Clostridium
spp., Peptostreptococcus spp., Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp., and Prevotella
Spp.25, 91. 145. 181,226 They are usually found in granulomas, cellulitis, abscesses, fistulae, and
other soft tissue wounds, but they may also be cultured from more superficial pyoderma,
otitis, or stomatitis cases.P"
Antibacterial susceptibility for obligate anaerobic bacteria has been rated as fol10ws25 , 26, 135: Ninety percent or more are susceptible to ampicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate,
carbenicillin, chloramphenicol, clindamycin, and metronidazole; 75% to 90% are sensitive
to cephalosporin, lincomycin, and penicillin G (except Bacteroides spp., which are resistant
to penicillin, ampicillin, and cephalothin); 50% to 75% are sensitive to tetracycline and
erythromycin; and less than 25% are susceptible to gentamicin and the fluoroquino10nes.145
Staphylococci are among the most resistant of the non-spore-forming organisms.
They resist dehydration, are relatively heat-resistant, and tolerate antiseptic medications
better than the vegetative forms of most bacteria. Their toxins may cause tissue necrosis at
the point of infection. Repeated injections of heat-killed staphylococci protect rabbits
against otherwise fatal doses of S. aureus. Bacterins may be valuable in combating chronic
infections in dogs and cats.
The numbers of resident bacteria on the skin tend to vary among individuals; some
animals have many organisms, whereas others have few. The number per individual may
remain constant, unless disturbed by antibacterial treatment or changes in climate. More
bacteria are found on the skin in warm, wet weather than in cold, dry weather.F? Moist,
intertriginous areas tend to have large numbers, and individuals with oily skin have higher
counts. Total counts of aerobic organisms on normal skin ranged from 1000 to 103
organisms/ems, and similar counts from seborrheic skin ranged from 103 to 107/cm2.136
Disease states influence the species and numbers of bacteria present. In seborrheic
skin, coagulase-positive staphylococci predominate.P" This is also true in most pyodermas
and in most other bacterial infections of the skin. In patients with various dermatoses
(atopy, seborrheic dermatitis, and allergic and irritant contact dermatitis in humans),
increased numbers of resident bacteria are found in all areas of the skin, not just in the
affected areas.158, 242 Compared with dogs that are normal, dogs with dermatoses have a

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 277

more prolific growth of aerobic organisms, a greater number of sites carrying coagulasepositive staphylococci, and a higher number of gram-negative microorganisms. Thus, these
animals are heavily colonized with potentially pathogenic bacteria, a fact to consider when
providing basic therapy for the primary dermatosis.
Microorganisms isolated from an intact lesion such as a pustule are evidence of
infection, not colonization. Colonization means that a potential pathogen is living on the
skin or in a lesion but that its presence is causing no reaction in the host. The problem in
evaluating a pyoderma culture is to separate secondary colonization from secondary infection. The presence of many degenerate neutrophils and phagocytosed bacteria is direct
evidence of a host reaction and is compatible with infection. Infection can be determined
by direct smears of lesion exudates, which may be more informative than cultures.

• SKIN INFECTIONS
The staphylococcal organisms, the primary isolates from skin infections in dogs and cats,
are not particularly virulent; thus, any skin infection should be considered a sign of some
underlying cutaneous, metabolic, or immunologic abnormality. Bacterial pyoderma is very
common in dogs, but rare in humans. The reasons for this are not known, but could
include anatomic and physiologic factors. The failure to detect differences in pathogenicity
of S. intermedius isolates has suggested that host factors, such as poorly developed
epidermal defenses, are important.Pt- Canine skin is characterized by a relatively thin,
compact stratum corneum, a paucity of intercellular lipids, a lack of a lipid follicular plug,
and a higher pH. Traditionally, skin infections are classified as either primary or secondary
to reflect the absence or the presence of an underlying cause.
Secondary infections are by far the most common and result from some cutaneous,
immunologic, or metabolic abnormality. Secondary infections may involve organisms other
than staphylococci, tend to respond slowly or poorly to treatment if the underlying
problem is ignored, and recur unless the cause is resolved. Virtually any skin condition
described in this text can predispose to infection, but allergic, seborrheic, or follicular
disorders are the most common causes of infection. Interestingly, infection appears to be
relatively uncommon in the autoimmune disorders.P" This may be due to the presence of
high cutaneous levels of cytokines, which have antimicrobial properties.
Allergic dogs are especially prone to infections because of the damage they do to
their skin while itching, the corticosteroids that they often receive, and possibly some
immunologic abnormalities associated with their allergic predispcsition.l'" When their skin
becomes infected, the level of pruritus increases quickly and does not respond well to
corticosteroid administration. Antibiotic treatment resolves the lesions of infection and
reduces, but does not eliminate, the pruritus.
Seborrheic animals have greatly increased numbers of bacteria on their skin surface,
which can colonize an epidermal or follicular defect and cause infection. They also
contribute to the alteration of the surface lipid layer to one that can induce inflammation.
In this situation, the patches of seborrheic dermatitis cause the animal to itch and induce
true infection in these areas. Superficial infections result in significant scaling during their
development and resolution. It can sometimes be difficult to decide whether the seborrhea induced the infection or vice versa. Scaling caused by infection decreases quickly
with antibiotic therapy. If seborrheic signs are still pronounced after 14 to 21 days of
antibiotic treatment, the animal should be evaluated for an underlying seborrheic disorder.
Follicular inflammation, obstruction, degeneration, or a combination of these predisposes the follicle to bacterial infection. Inflammatory causes are numerous, but de modicosis and dermatophytosis are most commonly implicated. Follicular obstruction occurs as
part of generalized seborrhea, in focal seborrheic disorders (e.g., feline acne and Schnauzer comedo syndrome), sebaceous adenitis, follicular dysplasias and other congenital disorders of the follicle, and endocrine disorders. Follicular degeneration can be caused by all
of these conditions plus alopecia areata. In cases of follicular infection, examination of skin
scrapings for demodicosis and evaluations for dermatophytes (e.g., trichogram and fungal
culture) are always recommended. After those tests, the skin biopsy is most useful because

278 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
pathologic changes are too deep to be appreciated with the naked eye. The inflammation
associated with the secondary bacterial infection can mask some of the histologic features
of the predisposing disease; thus, it is best to resolve the infection first and then perform
the skin biopsy.
The most common metabolic causes of skin infection are hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism (iatrogenic or spontaneous), but diabetes mellitus, other endocrine skin
disorders, and other systemic metabolic problems (e.g., hyperlipidemia) must also be
considered. These disorders predispose to infection by their impact on the animal's
immune system and the changes they induce in the hair follicle. In most instances, the
number of infected follicles is small compared with the number that are visually abnormal
(e.g., hyperkeratotic and hairless), so the index of suspicion for an underlying metabolic
disorder should be high.
The classification of primary infection is more problematic. Primary infections are
described as those that occur in otherwise healthy skin, are staphylococcal with rare
exception, and are cured by appropriate antibiotic therapy. This definition overlooks the
tendency for the infection to recur. It is common to examine a dog for a skin infection
and find no historical or physical abnormality to explain the infection. Is this a primary
infection, an infection secondary to some transient insult to the skin, or an infection
secondary to some as yet undefined underlying problem? The key to the primacy of the
infection is its tendency to recur. Infections that resolve with no residual skin disease and
do not recur with regularity or within a reasonable period (e.g., 3 to 6 months) could be
considered primary infections. If the infection recurs early, the animal has some subclinical skin disease or an immunologic abnormality.

• IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Immunodeficiencies are classified as either primary or acquired. Primary immunodeficiencies are congenital and are usually inherited. In these animals, infections develop early in
life for no apparent reason. Although German shepherd pyoderma tends to have a genetic
basis, the defect is not expressed until adulthood. Infections of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, urogenital, and integumentary systems are most common. In some cases, the skin
infection follows a known insult (e.g., flea bites) but is far out of proportion in severity to
the insult. Depending on the nature and severity of the immunodeficiency, the infection
mayor may not respond to treatment as expected. If there is a response, relapse weeks to
months after the discontinuation of treatment can be expected. A variety of primary
immunodeficiencies have been described in dogs, and those with associated skin infection
are listed in Table 4-1.
One of the most common primary immunodeficiencies diagnosed in dogs is selective
IgA deficiency." Caution is warranted because wide variation in serum IgA levels is seen
with the use of different commercial kits. ll7a Laboratories using these kits must prepare
their own reference ranges rather than rely on values found in the literature or provided
by the manufacturers. If the animal is not IgA deficient, a cell-mediated deficiency is most
likely.54a
IgA and IgG deficiencies were described in Rottweiler puppies that had bacterial
pyoderma, subcutaneous abscesses, and demodicosts.t'" In addition, these puppies had a
paucity of CD3+ T cells in their secondary lymphoid tissue and irregularities in plasma
cell development.
Acquired immunodeficiencies are common complications of many serious systemic
tllnesses.s- 60, 66, 155, 265a Because the immunodepression follows the underlying disease,
there is no age, breed, or sex predilection for these acquired immunologic disorders. The
best-known examples of acquired immunodeficiency disease are associated with viral infections, especially feline immunodeficiency virus, and leishmaniasis. In most other conditions, the signs of the primary illness predominate and precede those of the immunodepression. Examples in which the skin looks normal or nearly so before the infection
include adult-onset demodicosis (see Chap. 6), hypothyroidism (see Chap. 10), and hyperadrenocorticism (see Chap. 10). Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor deficiency was de-

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 279
• Table 4-1

PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCIES OF DOGS
BREED INVOLVED

MECHANISMS OF DEFECT

REFERENCES

Collie, Pomeranian, Cocker
spaniel
Doberman pinscher, Irish
setter, Weimaraner
Irish setter

Blockade of bone marrow
release
Bactericidal defect in neutrophils
Reduced granulocyte adherence

58

Complement deficiency
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia

, Brittany spaniel
Many

30
105

Selective IgM deficiency
Selective IgA deficiency
Cell-Mediated Defect

Doberman pinscher
Many
Bull terrier, Weimaraner,
others
Basset hound, Cardigan
Welsh corgi

Absence of C3
Delayed development of
functioning humoral system
Low IgM levels
Low IgA levels
T-cell dysfunction

225
41, 75, 77, 225
100, 146, 204, 234

B-cell and T-cell dysfunction

104, 120a, 147,
227

DISEASE
Phagocytic Defect

Cyclic hematopoiesis
Granulocytopathy
Granulocytopathy

35, 67, 230
108,269

Humoral Defect

Combined Immunodeficiency
Ig = immunoglobulin.

scribed in a Rottweiler with chronic neutropenia and recurrent infections of the skin and
ears. l 66 a

• TREATMENT OF SKIN INFECTIONS
Satisfactory resolution of a skin infection necessitates that the cause of the infection be
identified and corrected and that the infection receive proper treatment. If the cause of
the infection persists, either the response to treatment is poor or the infection recurs
shortly after treatment is discontinued. If the cause is resolved but inappropriate treatment for the infection is given, the infection persists and worsens.
Skin infections can be treated topically, systemically, surgically, or by some combination of these. Most infections of dogs and cats are too widespread or too deep to be
resolved with topical treatment alone, but judicious topical therapy can make the patient
more comfortable and hasten its response to antibiotics. Topical treatment can take
considerable time and effort on the owner's part and can irritate the skin if the products
are too harsh. Surgery alone can be useful with focal lesions or can be performed as an
adjunct to other treatments. Management must be individualized.

Topical Treatment
Topical treatments are used to reduce or eliminate the bacterial population in and around
an area of infection and to remove tissue debris. 113. 167. 276 Debris removal is of paramount
importance because it allows direct contact of the active ingredient with the organism and
promotes drainage. Agents commonly used include chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, ethyl
lactate, benzoyl peroxide, and various antibiotics, especially fusidic acid, mupirocin, and
bacitracin."
Infections restricted to the skin surface (e.g., impetigo) or intact hair follicles may be
effectively treated with topical agents alone. When the number of lesions is small and they
are confined to a limited area (e.g., feline acne),282 antiseptics or antibiotics in a cream,
ointment, or gel formulation may be sufficient to resolve the infection. Benzoyl peroxide
gels or antibiotic formulations receive widest use. The benzoyl peroxide gels marketed to
veterinarians contain 5% active ingredient, which can be irritating, especially with re'See references 14, 49, 112, 113, 164, 175,216.

280 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
peated application. In most instances, antibiotic preparations are nonirritating. In most
cases, transdermal absorption of the agent is limited, but frequent application over wide
areas should be avoided.
Many potent antibacterial agents are available in topical form. 40 , 81a, 239, 276, 282 The most
commonly used are mupirocin, fusidic acid, neomycin, gentamicin, bacitracin, polymyxin
B, and thiostrepton. Important considerations for some of these agents are as follows: (1)
mupirocin and fusidic acid are more effective than other topical agents for treatment
staphylococcal pyodermas, (2) mupirocin has poor activity against gram-negative infections,
(3) neomycin has more potential for allergic sensitization than do most topicals, and
susceptibility is variable for gram-negative organisms, and (4) polymyxin B and bacitracin
in combination may be effective for gram-negative as well as gram-positive organisms;
however, they are rapidly inactivated by purulent exudates and do not penetrate well.
Mupirocin is particularly useful because of its ability to penetrate the skin and its very low
incidence of adverse reactions. Potentiation of topical antibiotics with EDTA-Tris is currently being studied, especially in the treatment of ear disease, and is likely to increase
the activity of the agent being studied."
Often, topical antibiotics are formulated with other ingredients, most commonly glucocorticoids. There are numerous antibiotic-steroid combinations (Gentocin spray, Otomax, Tresaderm, and Panalog). These are occasionally indicated in chronic, dry, lichenified, secondarily infected dermatoses (seborrhea complex and allergic dermatoses) and
pyotraumatic dermatitis and are commonly indicated in otitis extema. Several clinical and
bacteriologic trials in humans and dogs showed that these antibiotic-steroid combinations
were superior to either agent alone.
Widespread superficial infections are best treated with antibacterial shampoos.v 175, 216
The manipulation of the skin during its application and the vehicle of the shampoo
removes tissue debris, which allows better contact between the antiseptic and the bacteria.
When four commercial antibacterial shampoos were studied, none could completely sterilize the skin but all Significantly reduced the bacterial population.I'" Benzoyl peroxide was
the most effective, followed by chlorhexidine acetate. Another study demonstrated equal
efficacy of benzoyl peroxide and ethyl lactate, with fewer adverse reactions to the Iatter.!'
Mixtures of acetic and boric acid are also effective."
Product selection depends on the preferences of the owner and the clinician and the
condition of the animal's skin. Animals with underlying hypersensitivity disorders or "sensitive" skin (e.g., Shetland sheepdogs) should be bathed with nonirritating or minimally
irritating agents such as chlorhexidine or ethyl lactate. Benzoyl peroxide products should
be reserved for greasy dogs or dogs with deep crusted infections. In this latter group,
shampoo selection should be re-evaluated in 10 to 14 days because the skin will be much
different then.
A thorough bath with a 10- to I5-minute shampoo contact time is indicated at
the beginning of treatment. The timing to the next bath depends on the severity of the
infection, the cause of the infection, and the speed of the animal's response to the
antibiotics used. Some clinicians request that the client bathe the animal at a set interval,
typically every third to seventh day, whereas other clinicians give the client guidelines for
when a bath is indicated and let the client decide when to bathe. If the client is not
overzealous, the latter method is most appropriate because it treats the animal on the
basis of its needs.
In the case of deep draining infections, the hair in the area must be clipped to
prevent the formation of a sealing crust and to allow the topical agents to contact the
diseased tissues. Although shampooing is beneficial, soaks are more appropriate at the
onset of treatment. Hydrotherapy loosens and removes crusts, decreases the number of
surface bacteria, promotes epithelialization, and helps to lessen the discomfort associated
with the lesions. With warm-water soaks, the vascular plexus opens, which may allow
better distribution of the systemic antibiotic. For widespread infection, tub soaks with or
without whirlpool are most appropriate. Antiseptics such as chlorhexidine and povidoneiodine are added for additional antibacterial activity. Chlorhexidine has been most effective but may retard wound healing. 167
If there are draining lesions on a foot or distal limb, the area can be soaked in a

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 28 I
bucket. For lesions higher up on the limb, a newborn disposable baby diaper is a useful
aid. The outer plastic layer protects the house while the high absorbency pad holds the
soaking solution next to the skin. For these lesions, a mildly hypertonic drawing solution
of magnesium sulfate (2 tbsp/qt or 30 mllL of warm water) can be beneficial. Because
hydrotherapy hydrates the epithelium, excessively soaked skin macerates easily and may
become infected more easily. As the antibiotic therapy progresses, drainage should decrease. When drainage is slight after a soak, the frequency of soaking should be decreased
or stopped entirely. Typically, soaking is continued for 3 to 7 days.

Systemic Antibiotics
Systemic antibiotic agents are used for bacterial skin diseases that are not treatable with
topical therapy.P- 47, 246 Because the overwhelming majority of canine skin infections are
caused by S. intermedius, antibiotics that affect these bacteria and concentrate in the skin
are of primary interest.Pv 66, 83 Occasionally, Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp., and E. coli
are involved as secondary invaders in deeper soft tissue infections. In cats, the primary
bacteria are P. multocida and l3-hemolytic streptococci.P'' 248 Thus, the penicillins and
ampicillins are frequently effective antibiotics for cats with nonstaphylococcal infections.
Because each antibiotic has its own unique features, 1, 2 the drugs used frequently in
veterinary dermatology, namely the penicilltns.P" sulfonamides.P macrolides and lincosamides.s-? cephalosporins.l'" and fluoroquinolones.l-' should be studied before they are
used. Proper antibiotic use necessitates that the antibiotic inhibit the specific bacteria,
preferably in a bactericidal manner. Bacteriostatic drugs may also be effective as long as
the host is not immunocompromised. The drug should have a narrow spectrum so that it
produces little effect on organisms of the natural flora of the skin or the intestinal tract
(for oral medications). The antibiotic should be inexpensive, should be easily given
(orally, if it is to be prescribed for home use) and absorbed, and should have no adverse
effects.
The most important factors influencing the effectiveness of antibiotics are the susceptibility of the bacteria and the distribution to the skin in effective levels of activity at the
infection site. Only about 4% of the cardiac output of blood reaches the skin, compared
with 33% that reaches muscle.!? This variation is reflected in the relative distribution of
antibiotics among organs. In studies of the different regions of skin, the levels of penicillin-type antibiotic in the subcutis reached about 60%, and dermal-epidermal junction
levels reached about 40%, of the peak serum levels in dogs.!? Cephalexin levels in dog
skin are only 20% to 40% of those in plasma.PAlthough the epidermis is relatively avascular, studies of skin infections showed that
the systemic route of therapy is better than the topical route for all but the most
superficial infections. The stratum corneum is a major permeability barrier to effective
topical drug penetration. These facts led to the inescapable conclusion that the skin is one
of the most difficult tissues in which to obtain high antibiotic levels. Factors that may
reduce the effectiveness of a therapeutic plan are the following:
1. The organism is resistant to the antibiotic and, because most S. intermedius organisms produce 13-lactamase, antibiotics resistant to this substance should be selected.
2. The dosage is inadequate to attain and then maintain inhibitory concentrations in
the skin.
3. The organism may be surviving inside macrophages, where it is not exposed to the
effect of most antibiotics.
4. The organism is within a necrotic center or protected by a foreign body such as a
hair fragment.
5. The organism is walled off by dense scar tissue.
6. The duration of therapy is inadequate to eradicate the infection.

Over the years, multiple studies on the in vitro susceptibility of S. intermedius from
dogs have been published.l" 63, 65, 130. 134, 141, 161, 163, 174, 182, 192, 197,207,209,212,218-224,288 In many

282 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
instances, in vivo results parallel the in vitro ones, but not always. In the disparate cases,
the conflicting results may be due to pharmacokinetic problems or because the wrong
organism was cultured. As noted earlier, it is possible to isolate two or more different
strains of S. intermedius from the same dog and each can differ in its antibiotic susceptibility. Another consideration is the pH of the skin and its influence on susceptibility data.
As the pH increases from 7.2 to 8.5, the in vitro susceptibility of S. intermedius changes
dramatically with resistance to most drugs at this higher pH.223. 224 Because the in vivo and
in vitro results usually correlate well regardless of the pH of the skin, this pH influence
probably is of little clinical concern.
The early susceptibility studies focused on the data collected during the years of the
study and often compared the susceptibility data from dogs that had or had not received
previous antibiotic treatments. In general, these studies indicated that previous antibiotic
use usually induced in vitro resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and potentiated sulfa
drugs. More recent studies have reported data from the same institution over many years
to see if the resistance pattern changed. If S. intermedius used plasmid transfer for
resistance, the organism should become more resistant with time.
Unlike the pattern of increasing resistance in human S. aureus, S. intermedius is
really no different in its susceptibility now than it was in the 1980s.19, 130, 161, 174, 192. 207, 209,
212, 218, 219, 223, 224, 288 Some variation occurs from year to year but, in general, a drug with an
excellent sensitivity (see later) in 1980 is just as likely to be effective in 2000. In one
study, previous antibiotic use in a dog did not increase the resistance to potentiated sulfas
and lincomycin.P Our case material also confirms this,255-257 With little exception.F"
canine S. intermedius has not become more resistant to antibiotics over the years, which
allows the clinician to select an antibiotic on an empirical rather than cultural basis. In
general, methicillin-resistant strains of S. aureus and S. intermedius are rarely isolated
from dogs.109., 213. An exception would be a report from Spain wherein an unparalleled
28% of S. intermedius isolates from dogs were resistant to methicillin.F"
In most clinics worldwide, S. intermedius from dogs is almost uniformly (>95%)
sensitive to the various fluoroquinolone antibiotics, amoxicillin clavulanate, oxacillin, and
first-generation cephalosporins. Although each fluoroquinolone and cephalosporin has its
own unique feature, in vitro susceptibility to one typically indicates susceptibility to the
others.P" Enrofloxacin may be two to four times more active against S. intermedius than
difloxacin, marbofloxacin, and orbifloxacin.P" Azithromycin and clarithromycin probably
will also give excellent results, but there are insufficient data to date. 139, 258, 271 Lincomycin,
clindamycin, tylosin, erythromycin, and chloramphenicol have a very good efficacy
(>75%), whereas potentiated sulfonamides are still problematic. In some studies, these
drugs have excellent susceptibility while others show only 50% efficacy.161, 174,218,223 In a
similar fashion, there is poor sensitivity of S. intermedius in the United States to ampicillin, amoxicillin, and the tetracyclines, whereas doxycycline or ampicillin is much more
effective in Australia or the United Kingdom, respectively.P" 174 Other regional variations
are also reported.
Data for cats are much more limited. Current studies on coagulate-positive staphylococci show excellent sensitivity to oxacillin, cephalosporin, chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin,
erythromycin, potentiated sulfonamides, and amoxicillin clavulanate; good susceptibility to
clindamycin; fair susceptibility to tetracycline; and poor susceptibility to penicillin and
amoxicillin.50,64, 198, 199,215,280
With the stability in antibiotic susceptibility of S. intermedius, the routine and regular
use of the bacterial culture and susceptibility test is not indicated. If exudative cytology
indicates an infection with coccoid organisms, it is safe to assume that the organism is S.
intermedius with whatever pattern of susceptibility it maintains in that practice area.
Multiple strains of S. intermedius with differing resistance spectra can often be found on
an individual dog. 174 Thus, the value and validity of antibiotic susceptibility tests on single
isolates need to be questioned. If the animal has a history of drug intolerance or allergy,
has not responded to a rationally selected drug in the past, or is very large with a
significant variation in the daily cost of antibiotics, culture and susceptibility testing may
be indicated.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 283
In addition to the susceptibility of the organism, various owner and animal factors
enter into the equation during antibiotic selection. Antibiotics are either time-dependent
or concentration-dependent in their action. Time-dependent drugs must be given at their
specified interval of administration for maximal efficacy. The total dose administered is
more important for the concentration-dependent drugs. It would be ill advised to dispense
oxacillin, a time-dependent drug to be administered three times daily, when the dog's
owner works 12-hour shifts. The owner could administer the drug three times daily, but it
would not be at the 8-hour intervals needed. Macrolides tend to be gastric irritants and
would be poor choices in a dog who vomits easily, Such factors as cost, taste of medication, and ease of administration all enter the picture when a drug is selected and may
"force" the clinician to use a drug he or she may not ordinarily use.
The depth of the staphylococcal infection also influences drug selection. Deep infections require protracted courses of treatment, can respond less favorably to certain drugs
than more superficial infections, and tend to become fibrotic. Twelve-week courses of
antibiotics are not unusual in treating some infections in dogs. At the time of this writing,
a 12-week course of fluoroquinolone would cost the owner about $150 more than would
treatment with a generic cephalosporin, Assuming that there was no medical indication for
the selection of the fluoroquinolone, the cephalosporin would be a wiser drug choice.
Long courses also make the use of sulfonamide drugs more risky. These drugs, especially
when used for long periods, are known to cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca," can induce
hypothyroidism (see Chap. 10), and are a common cause of adverse cutaneous drug
reactionsv" (see Chap. 9).
Deeper infections may not respond as favorably as superficial infections. For example,
in one study, doxycycline was effective in 53% of canine superficial infections and in only
14% of deep infections.P Finally, deep infections tend to be fibrotic and the organism
may assume an intracellular location where many drugs cannot reach it. For intracellular
organisms, the fluoroquinolones, lincosamides, and chloramphenicol are better choices.
With Significant fibrosis, antibiotic penetration can be poor. Co-administration of rifampin
and a 13-lactamase-resistant antibiotic may result in cure when the antibiotic alone is of
little use. 5 • 46 However, rifampin should not be used casually because it is expensive and
can cause hepatotoxicity.
Antibiotic selection is not so straightforward when the empirically selected antibiotic is
not effective or when the infection recurs shortly after treatment is discontinued. If the
empirically selected antibiotic has only good susceptibility, most clinicians empirically
select another drug with excellent susceptibility. If this new drug fails to be effective, one
must carefully evaluate whether the owner is complying with the treatment regimen and
whether the skin is truly infected. If no reason for this poor response can be found,
susceptibility testing is mandatory.
More commonly, the clinician is faced with the problem of antibiotic selection in
recurring infections. Most studies show that drugs with excellent susceptibility (amoxicillin
clavulanate, oxacillin, cephalosporin, and fluoroquinolones) maintain their efficacy in recurrences but that the in vitro susceptibility to the other antibiotics decreases and becomes
unpredictable. Some clinicians empirically select one of the excellent drugs, whereas other
clinicians perform susceptibility testing in all cases. Either position can be argued, and
each case should be managed on its own merits.
If cytologic study shows a mixed infection, susceptibility testing is mandatory because
the sensitivity of nonstaphylococcal organisms is not always predictable. If all organisms
are susceptible to a safe, reasonably inexpensive drug, that drug should be used. Occasionally, no one drug fits the susceptibility profile of all organisms or the Singular drug is too
toxic or expensive for long-term use. If the infection contains S. intermedius, as most do,
the initial antibiotic selection should be aimed at that organism. Eradication of the
staphylococcal component may make the microenvironment unfavorable for the growth of
the other organisms. If the antistaphylococcal antibiotic improves but does not resolve the
infection, alternative drugs must be used.
After an antibiotic has been selected, it should be dispensed at the correct dosage,
administered at the appropriate dosage interval, and be used for a sufficient period.

284 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
Dosages for the antibiotics routinely used in treating staphylococcal infections are given in
Table 4-2. Licensed veterinary drugs have detailed pharmacologic data to support the
recommended dosage. In our experience, the use of the manufacturer's dosage is satisfactory in most cases, and we initiate treatment at that dosage. Others suggest higher
dosages. For example, some references indicate that the dosage of amoxicillin-clavulanate
should be 22 mg/kg instead of the manufacturer's dose of 13.75 mglkg.165 When the
efficacy of these two drug dosages was compared, no statistical difference in the rate of
cure could be detected.!" Other studies have shown that the cure rate of deep infections
with cephalexin is increased when the dosage is increased from 15 mglkg every 12 hours
to 30 mg/kg every 12 hours.l'< 115 We, on the other hand, do not routinely increase the
dosage of cephalexin in deep infections and do not appreciate a difference in the rate of
cure. Clinical experience will dictate when larger drug dosages are indicated.
The most commonly recognized cause of the inability to resolve a skin infection, or of
its relapse days after the treatment is discontinued, is an insufficient course of treatment.
Although textbooks and clinical experience can suggest appropriate courses of treatment,
each animal responds at its own rate and must be treated until its infection is resolved.
Resolution means that all lesions have healed both on the surface and in the deeper
tissues. Surface healing is easy to determine by visual inspection, but deep healing is
much more difficult to assess and necessitates palpation of the lesions and regional lymph
nodes.
Intercurrent corticosteroid administration confounds the problem greatly. Corticosteroids decrease visual and palpable inflammation, which is the key sign in determining when
an infection is resolved. An inflamed hair follicle is still infected, whereas one that looks
and feels normal is probably healed. With concurrent corticosteroid use, it is impossible to

• Table 4-2

ANTIBIOTIC DOSAGES

ANTIBIOTIC

Narrow-Spectrum Agents
Erythromycin
Clindamycin
Lincomycin
Tylosin
Broad-Spectrum Agents
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
Oxacillin
Cefadroxil
Cephalexin
Chloramphenicol
Difloxacin
Enrofloxacin
Marbofloxacin
Orbifloxacin
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine
Bacquiloprim-sulfadimethoxine

Miscellaneous Agents
Doxycycline
Rifampicin
(0) = dog; (C) = cat.

DOSAGE

REFERENCES

15 mglkg q8h
5 mglkg q12h
11 mglkg q24h
15 mglkg q8h
22 mglkg q12h
10-20 mglkg q12h

210
1, 122, 169, 210, 217, 257

5-15 mglkg q12h
5-10 mglkg q12h
13.75 mglkg q12h
22 mglkg q8h
22 mglkg q12h (D)
22 mglkg q24h (C)
22 mglkg q8-12h
50 mglkg q8h (D)
50 mg/cat q12h (C)
5-10 mglkg q12h
5 mglkg q24h
2.0 mglkg q24h
2.5 mglkg q24h
15-30 mglkg q12h
15-30 mglkg q12h
55 mglkg (day 0-27.5 mglkg q24h
30 mglkg (days 1, 2)-30 mglkg
q48h

139,258
271
1, 129, 169, 177
129
1, 196

5 mglkg (day 0-2.5 mglkg q12h
5-10 mglkg 24h

29
5, 46

1, 23, 122, 210
127, 255, 256

10, 45a, 107, 112, 115, 196
2, 3
1,224a
83, 144, 214, 224a, 272
48, 144, 224a
1, 144, 224a, 261
42, 200
42,200
42,254
33, 42

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 285
determine whether the antibiotic resolved the inflammation, and therefore the infection,
or whether the corticosteroid is masking the infection. If an individual animal requires
both antibiotics and corticosteroids, the corticosteroid administration should be discontinued at least 7 days before the final evaluation of the infection.
In infections of the intact hair follicle, deep tissues rarely become inflamed enough to
be detected by palpation, so infection could still be present when the surface has healed.
To prevent relapses because of this inapparent infection, it is recommended that antibiotic
treatment be continued for 7 days after surface healing. In deeper infections, surface
healing is misleading and antibiotic treatment must be continued after the dermal inflammation is gone. Deep lesions always heal on the surface well before the deep infection is
resolved. Because some small, nonpalpable nidi of infection can persist even when the
tissues feel normal by palpation, antibiotic treatment should be continued for 7 to 21 days
after the tissues return to apparent normalcy. The time to resolution dictates the length of
postnormalcy treatment.
Ideally, the clinician should re-examine all animals to determine when true healing
has occurred. This is impractical in many instances and is not absolutely necessary in the
case of more superficial infections. As long as the owner is an astute observer and treats
the animal after clinical normalcy is present, most infections can be resolved without reexamination. Re-examination is mandatory for animals with deep infections. Owners cannot tell when the deep infection is resolved and always underestimate the need for
antibiotics. Some clinicians schedule examinations every 14 days, whereas other clinicians
examine the animal only when the owner reports that the lesions have healed. The
approach is individualized for best results.
Deep infections are problematic for both the client and the clinician. With follicular
rupture and damage to the dermal tissues, the inflammation tends to be pyogranulomatous and endogenous foreign bodies (keratin, hair shafts, and damaged collagen) are
usually found in the dermis. During the first 2 to 4 weeks of antibiotic treatment, the
lesion improves dramatically and then apparently stops responding. If treatment is stopped
at this point, any ground gained is lost because it is unlikely that the deep infection is
resolved. The rapid initial improvement is due to the resolution of the pyogenic component of the infection, but the granulomatous component remains and responds much
more slowly. As long as there is slow, steady improvement, the antibiotic administration
should be continued, even if the course of treatment approaches 12 weeks or longer. With
long-term treatment, most lesions resolve completely, but the healing of some lesions
reaches a certain point and improves no further. In these cases, the tissues never return
to palpable normalcy because of resultant fibrosis, the presence of sterile endogenous
foreign bodies in the dermis, or walled-off nidi of infection.
Skin biopsies can be both helpful and misleading. If infection is apparent, the need
for additional treatment is documented. If no infection is visible, the question remains as
to whether some infection is present in areas that do not undergo biopsy. If the lesion
does not improve at all with 2 to 3 weeks of additional antibiotic treatment, one must
assume that the infection is resolved and stop treatment. If infection is present, the lesion
begins to worsen again in 2 to 21 days.
Relapses are common in skin infections, either because the current infection was not
treated appropriately or because the underlying cause of the infection was not identified
or resolved. The timing to relapse is important. If new lesions appear within 7 days of the
termination of treatment, it is likely that the infection was not resolved. More intense
treatment is necessary. If the relapse occurs weeks to months after the last treatment, the
animal has some underlying problem that must be resolved.
No discussion of antibiotics would be complete without mentioning some of the antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory properties inherent to some of these agents: macrolides (inhibit leukocyte chemotaxis, IL-l, and lymphocyte blastogenesis), trimethoprim
(inhibits leukocyte chemotaxis), tetracyclines (numerous effects, see Chap. 3), and fluoroquinolones (inhibit IL-l, leukotriene, and TNF-a synthesis; inhibit granulomatous inflammation).96a, 225a, 274a These effects can be beneficial, but may also be misleading.

286 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
Management of Chronic Recurrent Skin Infections
Despite diligent diagnostic and therapeutic measures, some dogs have recurrent or nearly
constant skin infections. The infection responds to prolonged treatment but recurs within
weeks of drug withdrawal. Some of these dogs have a documented immunodeficiency,
whereas other dogs appear normal with the currently available tests or cannot be tested.
Poorly managed or poorly responsive allergic skin diseases must also be considered. The
allergic pruritus damages the skin and predisposes to infection. This is especially true if
corticosteroids are being used.
Immunomodulation can be considered in dogs with an immunodeficiency. The hope
is that this type of treatment will make the animal's immune responsiveness more normal.
It does not make a normal immune system hyper-responsive, so it has little or no benefit
when the skin infections are due to weak skin and not a weak immune system. These
treatments cannot resolve any pre-existing infection, but it is hoped that they can prevent
or minimize further relapses. 165, 204
The agents are given concurrently with an appropriate antibiotic until the infection is
completely resolved. If the animal has received a sufficient course of treatment with the
immunomodulator by the time that the infection is resolved, the administration of the
antibiotic is discontinued at that point while that of the modulator is continued. The
success of treatment depends on the time to, and severity of, any relapse, If no relapses
occur, treatment was a complete success. Because it is difficult to normalize the immune
system completely, many animals that undergo successful treatment do have other episodes of infection, but these are widely spaced, are less severe, and respond rapidly to
antibiotic therapy. In many dogs, no response to immunornodulators occurs.
Chemical modulation with levamisole or cimetidine has received attention for treatment of recurrent skin infections, but no published reports offer specific details on the
efficacy of either product.s" 165 Levamisole, when administered at 2.2 mglkg every other
day, is thought to modulate the cell-mediated immune system and may be of some benefit
in approximately 10% of dogs with idiopathic recurrent infections.l-' At this dosage, side
effects are rare but include adverse cutaneous drug reaction, gastrointestinal irritation
(vomiting and diarrhea), and blood dyscrasias. Because histamine receptors are found on
the cell surface of many mononuclear cells, histamine can affect cellular function.P"
Cimetidine, an Hj-receptor antagonist, may inhibit histamine-influenced immunosuppression. For dogs, dosages between 6 and 10 mglkg every 8 hours are suggested and side
effects are rarely reported. If either of these drugs helps to prevent relapses, it is
continued for the life of the patient at the dosages indicated above. The cost of the
cimetidine may be prohibitive, especially in large dogs.
Anecdotal reports indicate that human recombinant IFN-a may be useful in some
dogs with recurrent bacterial pyoderma. 246a The recommended doses are 1 to 1.5 million
IUlm 2 BSA or 1 to 3 million IU/dog, given orally or subcutaneously, daily or twice weekly
(see Chap. 3).
Various bacterial products have received wide use in dogs with recurrent pyodermas.
Autogenous staphylococcal bacterins, S. aureus phage lysate (Staphage Lysate lSPL, Delmont Laboratories]) and P. acnes (Immunoregulin [Immunovet]) are the most commonly
used preparations. The exact mechanism of action of these products in dogs is unknown,
but it seems to focus on improving cell-mediated immunity with subsequent impact on
nonspecific and humoral immunity.Pr'": 165 No studies have been published in which dogs
with recurrent pyodermas have been given all three preparations on a rotating basis to
determine which is most effective. Placebo-controlled studies with SPL and Immunoregulin have been conducted, but none with autogenous products has been reported.
Autogenous staphylococcal vaccines are prepared from cultures taken from the dog's
skin and thus contain the specific strain of S. intermedius causing the infection. Most of
the reports on the efficacy of autogenous bacterins involve small numbers of dogs and are
self-controlled. 16. 54. 70, 204 Despite these shortcomings, the studies show that some dogs
experience a good to excellent response to the bacterin. In a pilot study of 13 dogs with
idiopathic recurrent pyoderma published in 1997, 9 (69%) showed a good-to-excellent
response."? Anaphylaxis can occur with these products.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 287

Immunoregulin is licensed for intravenous use only and can cause a necrotizing
dermatitis if it is given subcutaneously or intramuscularly. It is given every third to fourth
day for 2 weeks, then weekly until the condition is resolved or stabilizes. Maintenance
doses are given as needed, usually once monthly. When 28 dogs with recurrent skin
infections were given either Immunoregulin or a placebo for 12 weeks, the rate of cure in
the Immunoregulin-treated group was much better: 80% versus 38.5%.21 Because the
dogs were given antibiotics concurrently with the immunomodulator and details on relapses were not available, it is difficult to determine the efficacy of the product.
SPL was first developed for use in humans and contains components of S. aureus. 78-80, 165, 234 It is licensed for use in dogs by subcutaneous injection. Dosage schedules
vary, but most investigators administer 0.5 ml twice weekly for 10 to 12 weeks. If
response occurs, maintenance injections are given every 7 to 14 days. If a partial response
is seen to the 0.5-ml dosage, gradual increases to 1.5 ml (the maximum dosage suggested
by the manufacturer) may improve the responses. When 21 dogs with recurrent superficial
pyoderma were given either SPL or a placebo for 18 weeks, 10 of 13 dogs (77%) given
the SPL had a good response, whereas 3 of 8 (46%) in the placebo group had a good
response." Responders did have subsequent infections, but they were reported to be less
severe with the SPL treatment and could resolve spontaneously.
This information suggests that immunomodulation may be of some benefit in carefully
selected cases. If the recurrent infections are due to skin disease and not immunodeficiency, response beyond that occurring with a placebo should not be expected. These
agents are expensive and not innocuous; thus, casual use should be discouraged. Because
cats rarely have recurrent skin infections other than abscesses associated with fighting, no
data are available on the safety and efficacy of these products in cats. One of us (W.H.M.)
has treated one cat with SPL given at 0.5 ml once weekly, and results were positive with
no adverse reactions.
When the dog's recurrent pyoderma is due to an unresolvable skin disease, usually an
allergic disorder, or does not respond to immunomodulation, control can usually be
achieved with long-term antimicrobial therapy. Topical antibacterial shampoos are usually
insufficient and may be detrimental if the shampoos irritate or macerate the skin. Antibiotics are necessary. Because the drug is given for a prolonged period, only drugs with a
wide margin of safety should be used. Most cases are treated with a cephalosporin,
oxacillin, amoxicillin clavulanate, or a fluoroquinolone. Macrolides and lincosamides are
safe for long-term administration, but bacterial resistance usually precludes their use.
Antibiotics can be administered to these dogs on a recurrent episodic basis or continually. If the interinfection interval is 2 months or longer, episodic administration is most
appropriate. At the first sign of infection, the drug is given at full therapeutic levels until
the infection is resolved and then for an additional 7 to 14 days. When the infections
recur shortly after the drug administration is discontinued, long-term treatment is indicated.l'" The dog is first treated with the full therapeutic dosages for 7 to 14 days after
clinical remission, and then therapy is changed to a suboptimal or pulse regimen. No data
suggest that one method is more effective or less likely to cause side effects, so the
protocol selected should be tailored to the patient's needs. The pulse method involves the
administration of full therapeutic dosages for 7 days, with none given for the next 7 days.
Depending on the animal's response, the interval with no treatment could be extended to
10 to 21 days.
A variety of suboptimal protocols are used. To clarify the discussion, let us say that
the full therapeutic dosage of the drug of choice for the patient is 500 mg every 12 hours.
After the infection is resolved, some investigators administer 500 mg every 24 hours,
whereas others administer 500 mg every 12 hours every other day and one investigator
administers 500 mg q12h for 2 consecutive days each week,22 If the patient's infection
does not recur, additional reductions may be indicated. The investigators who use oncedaily therapy often reduce the daily dosage to 250 mg or maintain the 500-mg dosage but
administer it less often (e.g., every 48 or 72 hours). When the drug is not administered
daily, the treatment interval is extended to every third or fourth day. After the lowest

288 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

level of treatment is determined, the animal is maintained with that protocol for life or
until it becomes ineffective.
Long-term antibiotic administration is expensive, especially for large dogs, but has
surprisingly few side effects. Concerns for the development of resistant staphylococci,
plasmid transfer of resistance to other organisms, superinfections with yeast or other
fungal organisms (with the possible exception of Malassezuii, or drug intoxications have
not been realized. However, these concerns are valid, so this type of treatment should be
undertaken only as a last resort."

• SURFACE BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Pyotraumatic dermatitis occurs in two histopathologic patterns. One, clinically called acute
moist dermatitis, is a superficial, ulcerative inflammatory process caused by trauma (see
Chap. 16). The other pattern, pyotraumatic folliculitis, is a deep suppurative folliculitis
(see later discussion). Intertrigo, or skin fold dermatitis, is a surface irritation and inflammation caused by frictional trauma of skin rubbing against skin (see Chap. 16).

• SUPERFICIAL BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
(SUPERFICIAL PYODERMAS)
Superficial pyodennas are bacterial infections that involve the epidermis and follicular
epithelium. They include impetigo, mucocutaneous pyoderma, superficial bacterial folliculitis, and dermatophilosis.

Impetigo
Impetigo is characterized by nonfollicular subcomeal pustules that affect sparsely haired
areas of the skin.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Impetigo is a bacterial disease that is invariably caused by coagulase-positive Staphylococcus organisms. It affects young dogs before or at the time of puberty. It is not contagious.
Many cases in puppies occur for no apparent reason, whereas in other puppies the
infection is secondary to parasitism, viral infections, a dirty environment, or poor nutrition.
Bullous impetigo is most often associated with hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, or other debilitating diseases, and in these cases other bacteria such as
Pseudomonas spp. and E. coli may be present."
A superficial pustular dermatitis has been described in kittens in association with
overzealous "mouthing" by the queen. Cultures revealed P. multocida or f3-hemolytic
streptococci. 248

CLINICAL FEATURES
Small superficial pustules that do not involve hair follicles are found primarily, but not
exclusively, in the glabrous areas of the inguinal and axillary regions in dogs (Fig. 4-lA).
They are not painful and rupture easily, leaving a peripheral epidermal collarette or
honey-colored crust adherent to the skin. Pruritus is uncommon and, if present, usually
indicates follicular involvement and, therefore, not a true impetigo. This is a relatively
benign problem that often heals spontaneously and may be noted only incidentally. In
kittens, lesions are found mostly on the back of the neck, the head, and the withers. In
bullous impetigo, the nonfollicular pustules are large and flaccid (Fig. 4-1B), and large
sheets of superficial epidermis may be seen to peel away. Coagulase-positive staphylococci
are usually cultured from the lesions. Diagnosis is made by the history and the clinical

FIGURE 4-1. A, Multiple erythematous papules, pustules, and crusts on the abdomen of a dog with impetigo.
B, Large, flaccid, pustule of bullous impetigo in an old dog with immunodeficiency. C, Mucocutaneous pyo-

derma. Multiple fistulae are visible. D, Lateral thorax of a Shar Pei with superficial folliculitis. Note the motheaten appearance. E, Superficial folliculitis on the lateral leg. Note the follicular pattern. F, Active erythematous
papules and oozing at the periphery of chronic hyperpigmented plaques in a dog with superficial staphylococcal
folliculitis. G, Annular, coalescing areas of alopecia and hyperpigmentation with peripheral erythema and crust in
a dog with superficial staphylococcal folliculitis. H, Staphylococcal folliculitis on face and ears of Siamese cat.

290 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
appearance and by documentation of the bacterial cause by direct smears and stains or by
cultures of the pustular exudate. Histopathologic findings show nonfollicular subcorneal
pustules (Fig. 4-2). Bacteria mayor may not be visible within the pustules.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Impetigo may regress spontaneously, but therapy can hasten the healing process. When
the lesions are few and widely separated, topical antibiotic or antibacterial creams or
water-miscible ointments, such as mupirocin and chlorhexidine, can be effective.'? Typically, the lesions are too numerous to make this form of therapy practical, and bathing
with antibacterial shampoos, such as chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate, and benzoyl peroxide, is
indicated. The skin of puppies and kittens is easily irritated, and benzoyl peroxide should
be used carefully. The affected areas are washed daily or on alternate days until healing
occurs, typically in 7 to 10 days. Rarely are systemic antibiotics necessary, but if needed, a
10- to 14-day course is usually sufficient unless there is an intercurrent superficial folliculitis. It is desirable to check health management procedures to eliminate debilitating factors
that may have influenced the onset of the disorder.
Impetigo-like lesions in unusual locations (e.g., facial) in puppies or in mature dogs
necessitate more careful consideration and may carry a more guarded prognosis because
immunosuppression and other serious disorders mentioned earlier may be involved in the
pathogenesis. Bullous impetigo usually responds rapidly to the administration of appropriate antibiotics and treatment of the underlying disease.

Mucocutaneous Pyoderma
Mucocutaneous pyoderma occurs in dogs and affects primarily the lips and perioral
skin.t 42 Its etiology is unknown.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs of any age, breed, or sex can be affected. German shepherd dogs and German
shepherd crosses may be at greater risk. The first noticeable change is symmetric swelling
and erythema of the lips (Fig. 4-3), especially at the commissures. Crusting follows and

FIGURE 4-2. Staphylococcal impetigo in a dog. Note nonfollicular subcorneal pustule.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 291

FIGURE 4-3. Mucocutaneous
pyoderma. Involvement of most of
the lower lip. The crusting has
been removed to show the erosion
and depigmentation.

can lead to fissuring and erosion (see Fig. 4-1C). Exudate may be present beneath the
crusts, especially ventral to the lips. Similar lesions may be at the eyelids, the nares, the
vulva, the prepuce, or the anus. Depigmentation of the lips can occur in chronic cases.
The lesions are tender, and the dogs rub the areas and resent examination and
palpation of the area. Mucocutaneous pyoderma does not originate in lip folds but can
coexist with lip fold dermatitis.

DIAGNOSIS
Mucocutaneous pyoderma is visually distinctive.v'" Differential diagnostic possibilities include discoid lupus erythematosus, lip fold intertrigo, zinc-responsive dermatosis, early
pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, and adverse cutaneous drug reaction.
Diagnosis is confirmed by clinical examination and skin biopsy. Histopathologic study
shows epidermal hyperplasia with superficial pustulation and crusting (Fig. 4-4). In the
dermis, a dense, predominately plasmacytic, lichenoid dermatitis is visible. Neutrophils are
also prominent in the inflamed dermis, and pigmentary incontinence may be striking (Fig.
4-5). However, the dermal-epidermal interface is not obscured, and hydropic degeneration is minimal to absent. Similar but milder inflammatory changes may be detectable
around appendages in biopsy specimens of haired skin.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The condition responds to topical or systemic antibacterial therapy. For topical treatment,
the surrounding hairs should be clipped and then the areas gently washed with benzoyl
peroxide or some other suitable antibacterial shampoo. After the lesions are cleaned, a
light film of an antibacterial ointment is applied. Mupirocin is particularly effective. The
areas are treated daily for 14 days and then once to twice weekly. In severe cases,
systemic antibiotics are necessary for 3 to 4 weeks.
After the lesions have resolved, treatment can be discontinued, but relapses are
common. For relapsing cases, normalcy can be maintained by an individualized topical
program or, more rarely, maintenance administration of systemic antibiotics.

Superficial Bacterial Folliculitis
A common clinical presentation is infection confined to the superficial portion of the hair
follicle.

292 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-4. Mucocutaneous
pyoderma, Marked epidermal hyperplasia and surface crusting.

FIGURE 4-5. Mucocutaneous pyoderma, Lichenoid dermatitis with plasma cells, neutrophils, and pigmentary incontinence.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 293

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In most cases, superficial folliculitis in dogs is caused by S. intermedius, although other
staphylococcal species and other bacteria may be involved. Organisms may be introduced
by local trauma, by bruising or scratching, or as an infection resulting from contamination
due to dirty coats or poor grooming, seborrhea, parasitic infestation (especially demodicosis), hormonal factors, local irritants, or allergies. The three most common etiologic
agents in canine folliculitis are staphylococci, dermatophytes, and demodectic mites. Superficial folliculitis may progress to deep folliculitis, furunculosis, and even cellulitis.
Folliculitis mayor may not be pruritic, and if it is pruritic, its intensity can vary. It is
not clear why these two types of folliculitis exist or even if the two syndromes (pruritic
and nonpruritic) are separate dermatoses. The clinical lesions, described histopathologic
findings, and levels of antistaphylococcal IgE antibodies'!" are identical for both types, the
only difference between the two being the pruritus. A few cases may be due to bacterial
hypersensitivity (so-called pruritic superficial pyodermal.P" Because staphylococcal folliculitis can be pruritic, and because so many pruritic dermatoses (e.g., hypersensitivities and
ectoparasitisms) are frequently complicated by secondary staphylococcal folliculitis, it is
crucial and apt to ask, "Is it a rash that itches or an itch that rashes?" Often, the answer is
determined only by training the client to observe the skin before and during the next
recurrence.

CLINICAL FEATURES
The primary feature of folliculitis, regardless of the cause, is a tiny, inflammatory pustule
with a hair shaft protruding from the center. The typical pustule may be difficult to find
because pustular lesions are transient in dogs and cats, especially when the patient is
pruritic. More common lesions are follicular papules (earliest lesion), which mayor may
not be crusted; epidermal collarettes; hyperpigmentation; excoriation; and alopecia (see
Fig. 4-1D to F). Annular areas of alopecia, erythema, scaling, crusting, and hyperpigmentation-the so-called bull's eye or target lesions (see Fig. 4-1G)-are highly suggestive,
but many vesicular and highly inflammatory processes that begin from a point (e.g.,
impetigo and pemphigus foliaceus) may produce similar circular lesions. English bulldogs
have a fairly unique presentation. Infected areas are hairless and hyperkeratotic with
minimal inflammation (Fig. 4-6). Dalmatians may develop bronzing of the hairs in areas
of folliculitis.
Superficial folliculitis has neither a specific distribution pattern nor a characteristic
clinical presentation. Because staphylococcal infections are typically secondary to external
or internal skin damage, the localization of the infection depends on the predisposing
cause. With external trauma (e.g., laceration, fleas), the infection is initially localized in the
area of trauma. With underlying systemic disorders, truncal lesions predominate. In either
case, the infection can spread to involve wider areas, especially if the lesions are pruritic.
In chronic cases, most of the skin can be involved.
The clinical lesions depend on density and length of the hairs in the involved area. In
relatively glabrous areas, the papulopustular lesions described above are easily seen. In
haired skin, these lesions are not appreciated unless the hair is clipped away. In shortcoated dogs, the first sign of superficial folliculitis is a dishevelment of the coat in the
involved area, with small groups of hairs tufting together and rising above the skin's
surface. These early lesions are often confused with urticaria. With time, the hairs fallout
of the infected follicles and the dog is left with multiple, small areas of alopecia (see Fig.
4-1D). The exposed skin is usually inflamed, but in the Shar Pei and dogs with darkly
pigmented skin, the hairless areas look nonreactive, which can lessen the suggestion of
bacterial folliculitis.
With increasing chronicity, the alopecic areas enlarge to give the dog a moth-eaten
look. Adjacent lesions can coalesce to form large areas of inflamed skin,143 which can be
confused with dermatophytosis and a variety of other conditions. Careful inspection of the
periphery of the hairless area usually shows an inflamed epidermal collarette and more

294 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-6. Superficial folliculitis. Instead of the classic papular
lesions, the English bulldog often
develops partial hair loss and hyperkeratosis, mimicking that seen in
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and
nutritional disorders.

typical lesions of superficial folliculitis. In chronic cases, the coalescence can be so advanced that the dog looks like it has an endocrine alopecia. However, the approximately
annular appearance of the alopecic areas and the discrete borders between alopecic and
haired areas are highly suggestive of follicular inflammation or dysplasia.
Superficial folliculitis in long-coated dogs is much more insidious, especially when the
lesions are not pruritic. The first sign is usually a loss of luster of the hairs in the involved
area with increased shedding. The area mayor may not be seborrheic. With time, the
scaling increases or becomes apparent and the hair loss increases so that the hypotrichosis
is obvious. Coincidental with the increasing hair loss is the recognition of underlying skin
lesions. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs can have large, approximately symmetric areas of
alopecia over the trunk resembling endocrine hair loss. Careful inspection of the margins
of the alopecic areas reveals erythema, scaling, and epidermal collarettes.
Superficial folliculitis is rare in cats. 199 , 215, 248-251. 280 The most common presentation is
a crusted papular eruption (miliary dermatitis), which is clinically indistinguishable from
the other crusted papular lesions of cats. Some cats have annular areas of alopecia,
scaling, and crusting over the head and neck (see Fig. 4-1H), which is more commonly
produced by dermatophytosis or demodicosis.
DIAGNOSIS

With adequate visualization of the lesions, the clinical diagnosis of superficial folliculitis is
usually straightforward. The papular or pustular lesion has a follicular orientation. Because
most cases of superficial folliculitis in the dog are staphylococcal in origin, it is likely that
the patient being examined has a pyoderma. However, this is not absolute because
follicular inflammation (folliculitis) also occurs in a number of conditions, including demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and a variety of immune-mediated skin disorders such as pemphigus foliaceus. To confuse the issue further, an inflamed hair follicle is easily infected
such that secondary staphylococcal folliculitis is commonly superimposed on some other
folliculopathy.
To confirm the diagnosis of bacterial superficial folliculitis, diagnostic tests must be
performed. Skin scrapings and fungal techniques (hair examination and fungal culture)

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 295

should be performed to rule out the other common causes of folliculitis, and exudative
cytologic specimens should be evaluated. The pus should contain cocci, neutrophils in
varying stages of degeneration and, most importantly, evidence of bacterial phagocytosis.
If no exudate is available or if the cytologic examination shows bacterial infection but
the distribution and nature of the lesions suggests that the infection was caused by some
other inflammatory folliculopathy, skin biopsies are necessary to define the problem. The
histopathologic study of bacterial folliculitis shows a neutrophilic exudate within the hair
follicles (suppurative luminal folliculitis) (Fig. 4-7). Bacteria mayor may not be visible
within the infected follicles. If a biopsy is performed on chronic nonpustular lesions, one
often finds superficial, suppurative interstitial dermatitis, perifolliculitis, perifollicular fibrosis, and/or intraepidermal neutrophilic microabscesses. In the folliculitis of English bulldogs, the predominant alteration is marked follicular and surface hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and interstitial to periadnexal inflammation (Fig. 4-8).
Because skin infections rarely occur spontaneously in dogs and cats, the diagnostic
effort should not stop at the identification of staphylococcal folliculitis. The most important question to be answered is, 'Why is the skin infected?" The history and physical
examination become important here. If there is any evidence of antecedent pruritus or
skin disease before the pyoderma develops, the diagnostic effort needs to continue to
define the underlying cause of the infection. In many cases, especially when the pyoderma
is chronic and the lesions are pruritic, the history and the physical examination are of
minimal use. Here, one is faced with the choice of performing other diagnostic tests (e.g.,
routine laboratory screening, endocrine testing, and allergy testing) or simply treating the
infection appropriately.
Obviously, the specifics of the case dictate the best course of action, but if the animal
has never been adequately treated for a superficial staphylococcal folliculitis, it is probably
best to resolve the infection. It is not unusual for dogs with chronic widespread superficial
folliculitis to return to clinical normalcy and remain normal after the infection is resolved.
Obviously, the cause of the pyoderma in those cases was transient. If the animal's
uninfected skin is abnormal or if the pyoderma recurs within 3 months of the cessation of
treatment, the animal has some other disease that must be diagnosed and treated to
prevent further relapses. Careful review of the history and the physical examination
findings after antibiotic treatment directs the diagnostic effort.

FIGURE 4-7. Staphylococcal folliculitis in a dog. Note cellular exudate within hair follicle.

296 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-8. Superficial folliculitis in an English bulldog.
Marked luminal hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and periadnexal inflammation.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
A superficial folliculitis in an immunologically normal animal heals fairly rapidly with a
typical course of treatment of 21 to 28 days. In the case of recurrent infections, it is not
uncommon for the lesions to heal more slowly, so longer courses of treatment can be
expected.

Dermatophilosis
Dermatophilosis (cutaneous streptotrichosis) is an actinomycetic disease that produces a
superficial, crusted dermatitis caused by Dermatophilus congolensis. It is rare in small
animals." 44. 55, 203
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The organism is a gram-positive coccus that has rarely been found in the environment and
therefore is thought to come from only carrier animals, usually farm animals." 44, 203 The
clinical disease often develops shortly after the rainy season begins and is uncommon in
dry climates. Moisture that releases the infectious zoospores is an essential initiating
factor. Affected animals usually have skin defects from ectoparasites, minor trauma, maceration, inflammation, or infection. Thus, the organism is usually a secondary invader that
is easily found by stained smears or cultures. These are motile organisms that eventually
form flagellated zoospores. That form is highly resistant and may persist in affected crusts
for several years. The motile cocci are chemotactically attracted to carbon dioxide diffusing from the surface of the skin. There, they germinate to produce a filament that invades
the living epidermis and proliferates within it, causing the production of typical crusts.'?'

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 297

CLINICAL FEATURES
Dennatophilosis is a rare disease in small animals, but it may be more common than is
realized in moist, warm climates such as northern Australia, New Zealand, and the
southeastern United States. It should be suspected in cases of acute moist dermatitis,
chronic folliculitis, seborrheic dermatitis, and other crusted dermatoses in which excessive
moisture is present. It has been noted to affect dogs2, 231 and cats,2, 44, 203, 248 and one
report suggests that the fox is the only natural canine host. 231
Lesions may involve all parts of the hairy or glabrous skin, and in cats, the organism
has been isolated from soft tissue fistulae and granulomatous lesions of the lymph nodes,
the mouth, and the bladder. With skin lesions, the crusts are usually concentrated on the
dorsal back and over the scapula and lateral thigh. The face, the ears, and the feet may
also be affected, and pain is evident because the animals appear to be unhappy and are
disinclined to move around.
Local lesions may start as erythematous papules and pustules, with crusts that occasionally thicken and expand to several centimeters in diameter. They may be isolated,
circular lesions or may coalesce into larger areas. The classic lesion is an exudative,
purulent dermatitis below raised tufts of hair and crusts. In early lesions, these crusts and
the embedded hairs are easily removed ("paintbrush" lesions) to reveal greenish pus on an
oval, bleeding, ulcerated surface. The healing lesions are characterized by dry crusts,
scaling, hyperpigmentation, and alopecia.

DIAGNOSIS
The purulent exudate or crushed crusts can be made into a direct smear and stained with
Ciemsa's, Wright's, or Gram's stain or Diff Quik. The organisms can be difficult to
identify but appear as two to six parallel rows of gram-positive cocci that look like railroad
tracks (Fig. 4-9).
For isolation and culture of the organisms, crusts are ground with sterile distilled
water and let stand for 30 minutes. The inoculum is taken from the top of the water
mixture and placed in antibiotic-enriched (polymyxin B) media. Many media, such as

FIGURE 4-9. Dermatophilosis. Note branching chains of cocci ("railroad tracks") characteristic of D. congolensis in this direct smear of pus.

298 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
blood agar, are satisfactory, but Sabouraud's agar and MacConkey's agar should be
avoided. Growth of a rough colony (later becoming smooth) occurs in 3 days, but organisms are small at first and may be missed in the midst of contaminants.
Skin biopsy of the affected skin is diagnostic and is especially useful in chronic cases,
in which the exudative cytologic findings are often negative. Histopathologic study shows a
hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis or perifolliculitis-folliculitis with a palisading
crust of orthokeratotic-parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and leukocytes. Organisms are usually
easily demonstrated within the keratin on hematoxylin and eosin (H & E), acid orceinGiemsa, or Brown-Brenn stains.
Differential diagnosis should include seborrheic dermatitis, pustular dermatitis (impetigo, subcorneal pustular dermatosis, and pemphigus foliaceous), acute moist dermatitis,
staphylococcal folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and zinc-responsive dermatosis.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
With elimination of the primary inciting factors, many cases of dermatophilosis resolve
spontaneously. This involves removing the moisture, parasites, or trauma that may be
present.
The Dermatophilus organism should be eliminated from the skin. Because it does not
thrive in an acid pH, topical therapy and good skin hygiene are useful. Crust removal and
disposal are essential. Daily soaks with povidone-iodine or lime-sulfur solution given for 1
week and repeated weekly for 3 to 4 weeks are helpful. The systemic use of antibiotics is
most effective and should be the primary focus of treatment. The organism is usually
sensitive to ampicillin, cephalosporin, cloxacillin, lincomycin, tetracycline, tylosin, and high
doses of penicillin. It is resistant to erythromycin, novobiocin, sulfonamides, polymyxin B,
and low doses of penicillin. Positive cultures can often be obtained from the skin of
healed animals for 7 to 8 months and up to 15 months, an important factor in recurrence
of the disease."

• DEEP BACTERIAL INFECTIONS (DEEP PYODERMAS)
Deep pyodermas are serious bacterial infections that involve tissues deeper than the hair
follicle. They invade the dermis and often the subcutaneous tissue. They can cause
systemic signs of illness and often heal with scarring.
Deep pyodermas do not occur spontaneously in normal dogs and cats. There is always
a cause of the infection, and successful treatment mandates the identification of the
predisposing problem. When the infection remains localized to a small area, external
trauma (e.g., laceration, penetrating wound, animal bite, and foreign body) is the most
likely cause. When lesions are discrete but widely disseminated over the body, involve an
entire region of the body (e.g., the rump), or are generalized, the animal has some
additional disease that must be identified.
Deep skin infections are generally the continuation of a superficial infection or superficial folliculitis. The infection goes deeper into the follicles and breaks through the
follicular wall to produce furunculosis and infection of the dermis and subcutis. The
infection follows tissue planes and may extend to the surface, producing multiple fistulae,
or move deeper to invade subcutaneous and fatty tissues, producing cellulitis and panniculitis. The terminology for the condition depends on the location of the most obvious
lesion, which may be called folliculitis and furunculosis, dermal fistulae, or cellulitis and
panniculitis. Virtually any disease discussed in this text can be complicated by a deep
staphylococcal infection.
In most instances, the infection remains confined to the hair follicle or progresses
deeper at a gradual pace. In some cases, the progression is explosive. Factors that
predispose to deep pyoderma include host immunoincompetence, severe follicular or
dermal damage done by the primary disease (e.g., severe demodicosis), trauma (pressure,
intense licking or chewing, and scratching) to the infected area, and inappropriate treat-

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 299

ment of a superficial infection with an inefficient antibiotic, a corticosteroid, or both. In
addition, many infections have distribution patterns that reflect areas of the body most
subject to surface trauma. The basic pathogenesis of several common clinical syndromes is
the same: deep folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis; pyotraumatic folliculitis; nasal folliculitis and furunculosis; muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis; pedal folliculitis and furunculosis; German shepherd dog folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis; acral lick furunculosis;
anaerobic cellulitis; and subcutaneous abscesses.

Deep Folliculitis, Furunculosis, and Cellulitis
Deep folliculitis is a follicular infection that breaks through the hair follicle to produce
furunculosis and cellulitis.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Folliculitis and furunculosis start as a surface or follicular infection of bacterial, fungal, or
parasitic origin. If there is a generalized distribution, one should suspect causes such as
generalized demodicosis (see Chap. 6, Fig. 6-31D and E), generalized dermatophyte
infection (see Chap. 5, Fig. 5-4A and B), adverse cutaneous drug reactions, endocrine
abnormalities, seborrhea, and immunosuppression. Bacteria present are usually S. intermedius, but deep skin infections are more apt to have secondary infections from Proteus
spp., Pseudorrwnas spp., and E. coli.
Histologic examination of biopsy samples may be useful in understanding the mechanism, etiology, and state of development of the folliculitis and furunculosis syndrome.
Folliculitis is an exceedingly common gross and microscopic finding in dogs. Because it is
often a secondary development, a thorough search for an underlying cause is mandatory.
Folliculitis associated with bacteria, fungi, or parasites is usually suppurative initially. The
occasional case associated with atopy, food hypersensitivity, or seborrheic dermatitis is
usually spongiotic and mononuclear. Any chronic folliculitis, especially if there is furunculosis, can become granulomatous or pyogranulomatous (Fig. 4-10).
Furunculosis, regardless of cause, is usually associated with a tissue eosinophilia,

FIGURE 4-10. Staphylococcal furunculosis in a dog. Note follicular rupture with resultant
pyogranulomatous dermal reaction around hair follicle.

300 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
which is assumed to suggest the presence of a foreign body (keratin or hairs). When tissue
eosinophilia is secondary to infectious furunculosis, the neutrophil is the predominant
intraluminal and intramural leukocyte and is present in similar numbers to the eosinophil
in the perifollicular dermal inflammation. When the eosinophil is the predominant cell in
all these sites, the etiology is probably not infectious and the likely causes are insect!
arachnid-related damage or other sterile eosinophilic follicular disorders. The absence of
tissue eosinophilia with furunculosis usually implies immunosuppression, especially that
due to concurrent glucocorticoid therapy or demodicosis.
CLINICAL FEATURES

The nature of the initial lesions depends on the number of follicles involved in the area,
the depth and severity of the follicular involvement, and various host factors, especially its
immunocompetence. Infection of one or a few contiguous follicles induces discrete papular lesions of varying size, whereas simultaneous involvement of many follicles causes
poorly demarcated areas of alopecia, tissue swelling, and inflammation. The severity of the
infection can be estimated by the coloration and size of the lesions. Large dark red to
violescent lesions are more severely involved (see Fig. 4-12D) than those that are smaller,
more superficial, or more pinkish (Fig. 4-11H).
The progression of the initial lesions varies. Papular lesions soften to form deep
pustules that ulcerate centrally and usually crust over. Before ulceration, hemorrhagic
bullae may be present. Vibrissal follicles, which are infected, hemorrhage early in the
course of infection before more classic changes occur. The larger lesions become more
inflamed, become darker, and usually develop one or more fistulae that discharge exudate
to the surface, where it crusts. Some of the severely infected larger areas become necrotic
before fistulae develop and are irregular ulcers in the skin, which mayor may not crust. If
the infected area is traumatized (by pressure or pruritus), the speed and severity of
progression is accelerated and the normal perilesional skin often becomes involved.
Lesions of folliculitis and furunculosis can occur wherever there are hair follicles but
tend to be most common over pressure points or on the trunk. In short-coated dogs, the
lesions described earlier are easily recognized. In long-coated dogs, the long hairs surrounding the infection entrap the exudate and tissue debris and encourage the development of large crusted lesions. The severity of the skin lesions in these crusted regions
cannot be appreciated until the hair and crust are removed.
Bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis are rare in the cat (Fig. 4-12A). When they
appear, follicular papules and pustules are usually located on the face and head (see Fig.
4-1H) or over the dorsum in a flea bite hypersensitivity pattern. Cultures from these
lesions have most commonly grown staphylococci, both coagulase-positive and coagulasenegative, and occasionally l3-hemolytic streptococci and P. multocida. Feline chin folliculitis and furunculosis may occur as a secondary infection complicating cases of feline acne
(see Chap. 14).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Although bacteremia and sepsis are apparently uncommon sequelae of a deep pyoderma,
these serious debilitating infections necessitate careful, thorough, long-term treatment.
Identification and resolution of the underlying cause is essential for a complete response.
Most animals require a minimum of 4 to 6 weeks of treatment to resolve the visible
lesions. Resolution of palpable lesions may necessitate treatment for 12 weeks or longer.
Because of the seriousness of these infections, many investigators continue antibiotic
administration for a full 21 days after clinical healing.

Pyotraumatic Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Clinicians have long recognized that not all cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis (acute moist
dermatitis or hot spots) respond to therapy rapidly and completely. One study reported a

FIGURE 4-11. Folliculitis-deep pyodermas, A, Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis on the cheek and neck
of a dog. B, Nasal folliculitis (pyoderma) of a Pointer's nose. Pustules and crusts are typical of painful lesions. C,
Nasal folliculitis (pyoderma) showing pustules on dorsum of the nose. D, Pododermatitis (interdigital pyoderma)
showing pustules and draining fistulae. E, Pododermatitis (interdigital pyoderma) with severe edema, cellulitis, and
draining sinuses. F, Lateral rump and thigh of a German shepherd with furunculosis. G, Rump, thigh, and trunk of a
German shepherd with furunculosis. Note flea bite hypersensitivity type of distribution pattern. H, Rump of a
Springer spaniel with deep folliculitis and furunculosis.

FIGURE 4-12. A, Furunculosis of the chin in a cat with feline acne. B, Muzzle furunculosis in a dog. C, Acral
furunculosis in a dog. D, Severe pyogranulomatous furunculosis and fistulae on the hock of a dog. E, Draining abscess
in the neck region of a dog (area has been clipped). F, Clostridial ceIlulitis and necrosis associated with mastitis. G,
Bacterial pseudomycetoma (botryomycosis) on dog trunk. Area has been clipped to show nodules and draining tracts.
H, Canine bacterial pseudo mycetoma. Gram's stain of cutaneous discharge shows a tissue grain containing clumps of
gram-positive cocci.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 303

series of cases and discovered that they could be classified histologically into two
groupS.229 In one group, the lesion did not have a large bacterial component. It was a
superficial, ulcerated, inflammatory process of undetermined cause and pathogenesis (true
pyotraumatic dermatitis or acute moist dermatitis) that responded readily to simple cleaning and corticosteroid administration (see Chap. 16, Fig. 16-17F).
The second group also had superficial ulceration but, in addition, had deep suppurative and necrotizing folliculitis and occasional furunculosis (see Fig. 4-1lA). Clinically,
this type of lesion is thickened, plaquelike, and surrounded by satellite papules and
pustules. Lesions are especially common on the cheek and the neck. Numerous grampositive cocci were present in the deep follicles, and panniculitis and hidradenitis with a
neutrophilic infiltrate were common. The authors of this study speculated that the folliculitis was merely a complicating factor in some cases of pyotraumatic dermatitis. Alternatively, the infection could have been the primary event that induced the self-trauma.
There was a strong tendency for young dogs to be affected; this pattern was observed in
70% of the Golden retrievers and St. Bernards presumed to have pyotraumatic dermatitis
but in only 20% of all other breeds. Labrador retrievers and Newfoundlands are also
commonly affected. These cases represent true local pyodermas.
Treatment of pyotraumatic folliculitis should include early administration of a systemic
antibiotic effective against S. intermedius. It should be continued for 7 to 10 days beyond
clinical cure. Local clipping, cleaning, and applying agents such as Burrow's solution,
chlorhexidine soaks, and calamine lotion daily are often helpful. Elizabethan collars may
be indicated, but chemical sedation or analgesia is rarely necessary. Glucocorticoid administration is contraindicated.

Nasal Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Bacterial nasal folliculitis and furunculosis (nasal pyoderma) is an uncommon, painful,
localized deep infection of the bridge of the nose and the area around the nostrils (see
Fig. 4-11B and C). It is most common in the German shepherd, Bull terrier, collie,
Pointer, and hunting-type (dolichocephalic) breeds. The cause is unknown, but the disorder may start from rooting or other local trauma. The onset is rapid, and the condition is
progressive until treatment is initiated. Initially, a small number of papules or pustules
appear on the bridge of the nose. Because the lesions are either painful or pruritic, the
animal traumatizes the area, expanding the number of lesions and area of involvement.
The differential diagnostic possibilities can be extensive, depending on the number
and size of the lesions and the degree of self-trauma. With multiple, coalescent, crusted
papular lesions, the primary differential diagnostic possibilities include pemphigus (foliaceus or erythematosus), lupus erythematosus, drug eruption, and dermatomyositis. When
lesions are more discrete and papular to nodular, the primary differential diagnosis is nasal
eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis. Other differentials include foreign body, other
furuncular disorders (demodicosis; dermatophytosis, especially that due to Trichophyton
mentagrophytes or Microsporum gypseum), sterile pyogranuloma syndrome, and early
juvenile cellulitis.
Clinical management should include a careful consideration of underlying causes,
especially if the examination of smears and cultures are negative for bacteria or fungi. The
bacterial infections are usually secondary. Appropriate systemic antibiotics should be given
in full dosage for 7 to 10 days beyond clinical cure. Gentle topical therapy with wet soaks
using Burrow's solution or chlorhexidine, three times daily for 10 minutes, is excellent.
This must be applied gently to prevent further trauma to the tender, inflamed tissues. The
use of Elizabethan collars and sedation are rarely needed to alleviate pain and prevent
self-induced trauma during the first few days of treatment.

Muzzle Folliculitis and Furunculosis
This is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the chin and lips of young dogs (canine acne)
characterized by deep folliculitis and furunculosis (see Fig. 4-12B). It is almost exclusively

304 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
a disorder of short-coated breeds, such as boxers, Doberman pinschers, English bulldogs,
Great Danes, Weimaraners, Mastiffs, Rottweilers, and German shorthaired pointers.
The cause of this syndrome is unknown, but it is clear that bacterial involvement is
secondary. The initial lesions are hairless follicular papules of varying size, which histopathologically are characterized by marked follicular keratosis, plugging, dilatation, and
perifolliculitis. Bacteria cannot be seen or isolated, and there is no response to systemic
antibiotics. With time, the papules enlarge, ulcerate, and may discharge a seropurulent
exudate. At this stage, suppurative folliculitis or furunculosis is present and antibiotic
treatment often improves but does not completely resolve the problem.
We speculate that local trauma and possibly some undetermined genetic predisposition playa central role in the development of the initial sterile lesions. Many short-coated
dogs do not have muzzle folliculitis, even among the breeds predisposed to this disorder.
Those who do may be more genetically susceptible to the disorder. During play, puppies
frequently rub their muzzles and chins on hard, rough surfaces. Long hairs protect the
underlying skin, but short hairs offer little protection and could break off below the skin's
surface, inflaming the follicle and leaving the pilar canal open to bacterial invasion.
Further trauma aggravates the condition and effectively seals off the pilar canal such that
sterile or secondarily infected furunculosis occurs. After one infected furuncle develops,
more can be expected.
Treatment depends on the severity and the chronicity of the problem. Early on, the
lesions are few and are sterile. With modification of behaviors that traumatize the chin
(e.g., chewing bones and chasing balls over carpeted surfaces) and frequent cleanings, the
process can be arrested and the lesions heal slowly. Benzoyl peroxide products (shampoo
or gel) are commonly used for cleaning because they also reduce the surface bacterial
population and keep the hair follicle open. The chin is first treated daily and then as
needed. These products should not be overused because they can be irritating and
increase the follicular inflammation. If the gel is used, the owner should be cautioned that
the product can bleach carpets, furniture, and other fabrics. In cases that continue to
worsen despite these measures, corticosteroids can be beneficial. If the lesions are not too
deep, a potent cream or gel (e.g., betamethasone valerate) applied three or four times
daily rapidly decreases the follicular inflammation. For cases of deep lesions, we find that
fluocinolone in dimethyl sulfoxide (Synotic) is beneficial. After the follicular inflammation
is resolved, the use of the steroid should be gradually decreased and stopped.
Advanced cases are usually infected and necessitate a long (4- to 6-week) course of an
appropriate antibiotic. Because deep infections heal with scarring, the chin is easy to
traumatize, and endogenous foreign bodies (e.g., keratin and hair shafts) are typically
found deep in these lesions, the antibiotic treatment does not resolve the entire condition.
After the infection is resolved, the use of topical corticosteroids may be necessary to
prevent new lesions.
Rarely, a dog is presented for bleeding from the muzzle. Close inspection of the area
will show that the hemorrhage is coming from the vibrissal follicles. Aside from the
hemorrhage, the follicles usually appear normal and documentation of the infection is
difficult without a skin biopsy, Unless some other reason for the hemorrhage (e.g.,
cutaneous amyloidosis [see Chap. 9], bleeding dyscrasia) is apparent, treatment for infection is indicated.

Pedal Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Pododermatitis (interdigital pyoderma) is an inflammatory, multifaceted disease complex
that affects the feet of dogs. 189, 247, 279

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The cause of this disease is often unknown, but in no cases are the resulting lesions cysts.
The disease is complex and may be frustrating to diagnose and treat.P? Focal etiologic

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 305

factors include foreign bodies (e.g., foxtails, awns, thoms, wood slivers, and seeds) and
local trauma. When a single foot is affected, a foreign body, local injury, or neoplasia
should be suspected, especially if there is only one interdigital fistula. Arteriovenous
fistulae and lymphedema are rare causes of pododermatitis. The feet are subject to great
variety and intensity of trauma, the front feet more so than the rear. Hunting or field
dogs commonly have bruises from stones, stubble, and briars. Animals working in sticky
substances may accumulate masses of sand, stone, tar, and hair that initiate injury. Contact
with irritant chemicals, fertilizers, or weed killers may also cause trouble. Clipper bums
from grooming procedures, irritation from housing on wire or rough stones, and inflammation from contact, inhalant, or food hypersensitivities have all initiated pododermatitis.
Any of these factors may lead to intense licking, which accentuates the irritation.
Fungal infections associated with pododermatitis include dermatophytosis, Malassezia
dermatitis, candidiasis, mycetoma, phaeohyphomycosis, sporotrichosis, blastomycosis, and
cryptococcosis. These are uncommon but should be suspected in cases that are refractory
to usual antibiotic therapy. Bacterial infections are always secondary and can include a
wide variety of organisms. Bacterial hypersensitivity may be a complication (see Chap. 8).
Parasitic pododermatitis is particularly common, with demodicosis being its most
troublesome cause. Every case of chronic interdigital pyoderma must be evaluated carefully for demodectic mites. Biopsy may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis of parasitic
pododermatitis in chronically inflamed and fibrosed feet. It is often missed by other
diagnostic techniques (e.g., skin scrapings). Other parasites involved may include Pelodera
strongyloides, Ancylostoma spp., and Uncinaria stenocephala. Ticks and chiggers favor the
interdigital webs and may initiate inflammation.
Psychogenic dermatitis may be manifested as excessive licking of the feet by highstrung, nervous animals, especially Poodles, terriers, and German shepherds.
Sterile pyogranulomas may occur on the feet. The cause is unknown, but they are
most common in smooth, short-coated breeds such as English bulldogs, Dachshunds,
Great Danes, and boxers (see Chap. 18). Osteomyelitis or local neoplasms more characteristically involve a Single foot.
Cases of pododermatitis that involve several feet, are recurrent or refractory to
treatments, and are nonpruritic may be caused by an inherited or acquired immunodeficiency. Pododermatitis may also be the only clinical sign of hypothyroidism or demodicosis
with secondary suppression of cell-mediated immunity. One report suggested that the flat
foot and the scoop-shaped web of breeds such as the Pekingese and some terriers
predispose the area to folliculitis and pedal dermatitis.F"
Cases of pododermatitis with Significant footpad involvement (hyperkeratosis and ulceration) may have an autoimmune basis (pemphigus, pemphigoid, or lupus erythematosus) or may be a manifestation of adverse cutaneous drug reaction, zinc-responsive dermatitis, necrolytic migratory erythema, or canine distemper.
In spite of all these possibilities, a substantial number of cases are idiopathic, recurrent bacterial infections. These can be exceedingly frustrating to manage.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Pododermatitis may affect dogs of any age, sex, or breed, but males of short-coated
breeds, such as the English bulldog, Great Dane, Basset hound, Mastiff, Bull terrier,
boxer, Dachshund, Dalmatian, German shorthaired pointer, and Weimaraner, are more
commonly represented. Longer-coated breeds that are commonly affected include the
German shepherd, Labrador retriever, Golden retriever, Irish setter, and Pekingese. The
front feet are more often affected, but one or all four feet may be involved.
Affected tissue may be red and edematous with nodules, ulcers, fistulae, hemorrhagic
bullae, and a serosanguineous or seropurulent exudate (see Fig. 4-11D). The feet may be
grossly swollen (see Fig. 4-11E). Pitting edema of the metacarpal and metatarsal areas
can be marked. The skin may be alopecic and moist from constant licking, and varying
degrees of pain, pruritus, and paronychia may be present. The pain may produce lame-

306 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
ness. In some cases, the interdigital nodules are nontender and unresponsive to treatment
and may be scars from previous lesions. Although the regional lymph nodes are enlarged,
other systemic signs are rare.

DIAGNOSIS
A careful history and physical examination findings provide the diagnosis of pododermatitis. Because of the complex pathogenesis, all cases for which a cause is not quickly and
easily discerned should undergo multiple skin scrapings, exudative cytologic study, fungal
culture, and a representative skin biopsy. The direct smear may provide early clues of the
cause by establishing the presence or the absence of neutrophils or phagocytosed bacteria
and their staining property or by showing large numbers of eosinophils, mycetoma or
pseudomycetoma grains, yeast, or largely granulomatous cell exudate. Radiographs may
also be needed to identify bony changes and opaque foreign bodies. An evaluation of the
immune status is sometimes indicated and should include hemogram, serum immunoglobulin quantitation, and evaluation of the thyroid and adrenal glands.
Histopathologic studies are essential to document foreign bodies (including free hair
shafts or keratin in the tissue), bacteria, parasites, fungi, and neoplasia and to evaluate the
cellular response. Special stains may be needed. In general, the histologic response is that
of perifolliculitis, folliculitis, or furunculosis; with the last, a nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous inflammation is common. Contrast radiography studies are needed to document
arteriovenous fistulae and lymphedema.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Pododermatitis can be a frustrating problem because it is often self-perpetuating. Lesions
heal with scarring, which makes the foot more susceptible to future infections. Delays in
treatment of the infection and its cause increase the scarring potential, so the diagnostic
and therapeutic effort should be maximal in these cases.
If the lesions are draining, foot soaks for 10 to 15 minutes twice daily are indicated
until the drainage stops. Magnesiun sulfate is particularly effective. Antibiotic treatment is
prolonged, and 8- to 12-week courses are not unusual. Palpation is critical in monitoring
these patients because the surfaces of these lesions heal weeks before the deep lesions are
resolved. Lesions that are tender on palpation are likely still infected. As long as dermal
lesions are present and are becoming smaller, treatment should be continued.
Cases with advanced disease at the onset of treatment have varying degrees of
scarring of the digital and interdigital skin and may have sterile dermal granulomas due to
endogenous foreign bodies. Protection of the foot via restricting the animal's activity or
having the animal wear boots can help prevent future infections. Focal areas of scarring or
individual dermal granulomas may be amenable to surgical removal.
Some cases, especially those in which the infection includes secondary gram-negative
organisms, are resistant to medical treatment alone. Surgical debridement of all the
devitalized tissue may make medical treatment more effective. In severe cases, fusion
podoplasty in which all disease is removed and the digits are joined together can be
beneflcial.P"

German Shepherd Dog Folliculitis, Furunculosis, and Cellulitis
This is a familial, immunologically mediated deep pyoderma of German shepherd dogs or
German shepherd crosses.P: 84, 157,204.234,285-287 Affected dogs have deep skin infections,
which resolve slowly and recur frequently. Either there is no definable cause of the
infection or, if one is defined (e.g., flea infestation) ,157, 234 the severity of the infection is
well out of proportion to the stimulus.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 307
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
This condition has been studied extensively. Early work demonstrated a familial predisposition (possibly autosomal recessive). Affected dogs either had some underlying skin disease (e.g., allergic skin disease, hypothyroidism) or a cell-mediated immunoincompetence.
Dogs with an immunodeficiency appeared to be in the minority.
Recent studies have shown convincing evidence of immunodeficiency in all dogs
studied. Affected dogs have an increased number of CD8+ and decreased numbers of
CD4+ and CD21 + lymphocytes in their circulation.P Serum IgA levels were low in
one study but because selective IgA deficiency occurs in some normal German shepherds,23. 75. 105 the significance of this finding is unknown. Immunopathologic studies of
skin biopsies from dogs with deep pyoderma have shown that all breeds had similar
numbers of IgG, IgM, and IgA-bearing j3-lymphocytes and plasma cells.?" However,
German shepherd dogs had markedly fewer T lymphocytes than other breeds. German
shepherds with bacterial pyoderma had the same number of Langerhans' cells in skin
biopsy specimens as other breeds with bacterial pyoderma. 74.
The striking and seemingly inappropriate magnitude of inflammation seen in this
condition has led some authors to speculate that the heritable defect in these dogs is
associated with an exaggerated tissue response to staphylococcal bacteria, characterized by
an inappropriate release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators.P'"
Because affected dogs do not experience infections of other organ systems and skin
infection until middle age, they must have some degree of immunocompetence. With an
insult to their skin (e.g., flea bite hypersensitivity) or immune system (e.g., hypothyroidism), they decompensate and experience a disproportionately severe pyoderma. Some dogs
decompensate for no known reason, which suggests that the immunodeficiency can
worsen with advancing age. Dogs in this latter group require lifelong treatment, whereas
the other dogs may remain infection-free if the triggering disease is resolved.
CLINICAL FEATURES
The disease almost exclusively affects middle-aged German shepherd dogs and is not sexspecific or influenced by gonadal status. A familial history is occasionally given. In most
dogs, the lesions are pruritic, and the pruritus usually stops after the infection is resolved.
The distribution pattern is typical, with the rump, back, ventral abdomen, and thighs
being affected in all cases. Some animals have more generalized lesions spreading to the
chest and the neck. The front legs, the head, and the ears are usually much less involved.
Lesions are initially follicular in origin with clusters of papules, pustules, erosions, and
crusts followed by ulcers, fistulae, furunculosis, alopecia, and hyperpigmentation (see Fig.
4-11F and G). Early lesions may be surrounded by strikingly erythematous halos. The
lesions in haired skin are heavily crusted and the presence, depth, and severity of the
infection in these areas cannot be appreciated until the crusts are removed. There may be
a great deal of excoriation from the pruritus. Lesions may develop rapidly, forming
confluent plaques of ulcerated, friable, necrotic skin. Some animals have secondary seborrhea, and cellulitis is evident in deeper infections. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is common. Animals with the disorder are usually in general good health, although there may be
weight loss, poor appetite, and pyrexia. The lesions are usually painful, especially when
the crusts are removed.
The course of the disease is long and stormy, with frequent stages of partial healing
and exacerbation. This is usually produced by improper selection or inadequate dosage of
antibiotics and inadequate duration of treatment, the concurrent use of corticosteroids, or
failure to resolve predisposing factors.
DIAGNOSIS
The physical examination, coupled with exudative cytologic study, confirms the diagnosis
of deep pyoderma but does not document this syndrome. The diagnosis of this syndrome

308 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
is confirmed by the exclusion of other causes of deep pyoderma (e.g., demodicosis, allergy,
ehrlichiosis), by the disproportionate severity of the infection if the dog has not received
corticosteroids, or by repeated relapses.
All routine diagnostic tests are indicated in these dogs, as is an evaluation for thyroid
disorders. If the lesions are pruritic and the pruritus does not stop with elimination of the
infection, an evaluation for allergy should be performed. When all of these are determined to be noncontributory, an immunocompetency evaluation should be considered.
Skin biopsies are useful to determine underlying causes and to document the severity
of the tissue damage. In most cases, histopathologic examination of skin biopsy tissues
revealed folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis as the most common findings. 157. 234 Perifollicular pyogranulomatous inflammation was common, which supports the idea of the
disease being of follicular origin. Only a few biopsy specimens showed the large number
of eosinophils expected in furunculosis.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Because many cases have an intercurrent allergic disorder or hypothyroidism, every effort
should be made to identify and resolve this triggering event. If the predisposing disease is
ignored, the animal's response to treatment will be poor or the infection will recur shortly
after the antibiotics are withdrawn.
Clipping and topical therapy are essential in this disease. Twice-daily soaks or the use
of whirlpool baths helps to remove any crusts, improves drainage, and makes the patient
more comfortable. Long-term antibiotic administration is necessary, with 6- to lO-week
courses not unoornmon.w 154 It is imperative that the drug be given at the correct dosage
and frequency during and after clinical cure has occurred. Because these dogs are prone
to experience disproportionately severe infection, premature termination of therapy guarantees a severe relapse. Some authors consider enrofloxacin (5 to 10 mglkg q24h) to be
the antibiotic of choice.v'> Enrofloxacin is concentrated within inflammatory cells and is
unimpeded by granulomatous inflammation, fibrosis, and purulent debris. In addition, the
effectiveness of enrofloxacin may be partially explained by its anti-inflammatory properties.
With resolution of the infection and the triggering event, many of these dogs stay
infection-free for long periods. The owners must be made aware that their dog is susceptible to skin infections. Any irregularities in the dog's management or grooming should be
corrected, and the owners should be instructed to seek prompt attention whenever any
skin lesions occur.
Some dogs experience relapse each time that antibiotics are withdrawn. These dogs
probably have a cell-mediated immunodeficiency-": 234 and may respond to immunomodulation. Chronic antibiotic therapy can maintain these dogs for long pertods.P Anecdotal
reports indicate that pentoxifylline may be a useful therapeutic adjunct, presumably due to
its anti-inflammatory properties (see Chap. 3).

Acral Lick Furunculosis
Acral lick dermatitis (see Chap. 15) is well recognized in dogs and has a variety of causes.
Cytologic or histologic evidence of infection is found in many cases, especially those with
an ulcerated surface. What is unclear is whether the infection preceded the dog's licking
of the area or was superimposed on some underlying condition.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Acral lick lesions are typically found on the distal portion of a front limb but can occur on
a hind leg or on multiple limbs. The clinical appearance varies with the chronicity of the
lesion and the amount of trauma to the area. Typically, the lesion is firm, raised, hairless,
hyperpigmented at the periphery, and eroded or ulcerated centrally (see Fig. 4-12C). In
some cases, there is significant tissue destruction with exposure of underlying tendons or
bone.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 309

DIAGNOSIS
Infection should be suspected in all acral lick lesions, especially if the surface is ulcerated.
This suspicion can be confirmed by biopsy or, in many cases, by exudative cytologic
examination. For correct cytologic evaluation, the surface of the lesion should be scrubbed
to remove all debris and surface bacteria. After the surface has dried, the lesion is
squeezed firmly between the thumb and the forefinger until drops of seropurulent or
serohemorrhagic exudate appear on the surface. This material is examined cytologically.
This is painful, so the dog may need to be muzzled or tranquilized.
In many cases, evidence of infection (e.g., intracellular bacteria within phagocytic
cells) is found, and staphylococci are the primary organisms. In some cases, gram-negative
organisms are co-infectors. If gram-negative organisms are detected, a culture should be
performed, preferably from tissue taken via sterile biopsy technique. Culture of the
discharge expressed by manual pressure can be misleading because it may contain contaminating but not infecting organisms.
In some cases, no bacteria are visible cytologically or no exudate can be expressed. In
these cases, infection can be proved or disproved by biopsy or by a therapeutic trial with
antibiotics. If the latter course is chosen, a broad-spectrum drug should be used for a
minimum of 30 days before response is estimated.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

In acral lick furunculosis, the clinician is faced with the problem of determining the cause
of the infection and the treatment of a deep, fibrosing infection. With solitary lesions, the
cause of the infection is often a transient insult to the skin, which is not evident when the
animal is presented for treatment. Unless the history, physical examination findings, and
exudative cytologic study suggest some underlying problem, it may be best to resolve the
infection first and then to determine whether the diagnostic effort should go forward.
With lesions on multiple limbs, transient trauma can be discounted and a complete
diagnostic evaluation should be performed, especially for allergy or hypothyroidism.
Soaks, especially with magnesium sulfate, and prolonged courses of antibiotics are
necessary in acral lick furunculosis. The minimal course of treatment is 8 weeks, and some
cases necessitate many months of treatment. Because of the need for long-term treatment,
potentiated sulfonamide drugs should not be used. Most clients notice remarkable improvement within the first 3 weeks and then comment either that the lesion is getting no
better or that the rate of improvement is much slower. Because these lesions are fibrotic
at the onset of treatment, antibiotic administration should not be expected to resolve the
lesion completely. Treatment is continued until no further improvement is detected by the
clinician, not the client, and then for an additional 2 weeks. If, at the end of the
treatment, the area is more fibrotic and hairless or if the animal continues to traumatize
the area, the diagnostic effort must go forward.
The key to successful management of acral lick furunculosis is early and vigorous
intervention. The more chronic the infection, the poorer the prognosis for a complete
resolution. Large lesions heal incompletely and are covered by a thin, hairless, fragile
epithelial layer. Because these lesions are often found over joints or in areas that are
traumatized during normal activities, the area probably will be damaged in the future,
which could trigger another infection. If there is Significant tissue destruction at first
presentation or after the infection is resolved, amputation of the limb may be indicated.

Aerobic Cellulitis
Cellulitis is a severe, deep, suppurative infection in which the areas of infection are poorly
contained and spread laterally.s Depending on the cause of the cellulitis, there may be
extensive edema and the overlying skin is often friable, darkly discolored, and devitalized. 54• 55 The weakened tissues may be sloughed.
In companion animals, most cases of focal aerobic cellulitis follow wounding and are

3 I0 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
diagnosed and treated accordingly. With more diffuse disease, deep extension of staphylococcal folliculitis and furunculosis is most likely. Rarely, one isolates an unusual (e.g.,
Pseudomonas spp.) organism. 233 In these cases, the skin lesions typically look more severe
than those with staphylococci. In these cases, the question to be answered is whether the
organism caused all of the damage or whether some other skin disease is present that is
being secondarily infected by the bacterium. Each case must be evaluated on its own
merits. Once these unusual bacteria are infecting deep tissues, aggressive antibiotic treatment are needed.

Anaerobic Cellulitis
Lesions of anaerobic cellulitis in companion animals tend to be more rapidly progressive
and severe than their aerobic counterparts. Anaerobic cellulitis typically follows bite
wounds, traumatic puncture wounds, or foreign body introduction but can be a sequela to
surgery, trauma, bums, or malignancy.69, 226 Poor management of indwelling catheters can
predispose to Serratia infection.P In humans, diabetes mellitus, corticosteroid administration, or immunodeficiency predisposes to anaerobic infection, and these factors are probably important in animals.
Anaerobic infections are characterized by rapid progression, poor demarcation, massive tissue edema and swelling, and necrosis (see Fig. 4-12F). The wounds often, but not
uniformly, have a putrid smell and are crepitant if the organism is a gas producer
(Clostridium spp. and Bacteroides Spp.).90· 91. 102 Depending on the organism, toxins may
be produced and cause profound systemic signs.
The presumptive diagnosis of anaerobic cellulitis can be confirmed by the presence of
the clinical signs described. Exudative cytologic examination that yields neutrophilic and
polybacterial findings is supportive. Anaerobes commonly isolated from dogs and cats are,
in decreasing order of frequency, Bacteroides spp., Peptostreptococcus spp., Fusobacterium
spp., Porphqromonas spp., Clostridium spp., and Prevotella Spp.145 With rare exception, all
these anaerobes are susceptible to metronidazole, chloramphenicol, and amoxicillin clavulanate. Aside from Bacteroides spp., near-uniform susceptibility to ampicillin or clindamycin can be expected. Facultative anaerobes are of more concern because the susceptibility
of these organisms can be limited and unpredictable.
Surgery is indicated to drain the exudate, remove necrotic tissue, and remedy tissue
hypoxia. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment can be beneficial but is usually not available.i"- 222
Systemic antibiotics should be administered until the infection is resolved and then for an
additional 7 to 14 days. Drugs of choice include metronidazole, chloramphenicol, and
amoxicillin clavulanate.

Subcutaneous Abscesses
Subcutaneous abscesses are uncommon in dog but occur frequently in cats. In dogs,
abscesses can be due to bite wounds, abscessed teeth, or foreign bodies (see Figs. 4-12E
and 4-13), whereas bite wounds are most common in cats. P. multocida is the most
common organism cultured from dog and cat bite wounds.P: 137 Other organisms that can
be involved include S. intermedius, l3-hemolytic streptococci, and various anaerobes, including Fusobacterium spp., Bacteroides spp., Clostridium spp., Peptostreptococcus spp.,
and Porphqromouas spp.151a. 211 Bacteria from claw or fang are injected under the skin
when it is punctured during a cat fight. The wound is small and seals rapidly; a local
infection develops in 2 to 4 days. Some bite wounds are handled well by the eat's normal
defense mechanisms. Those that abscess are most commonly found around the tail base
and the neck and shoulders.
Abscess from bite wounds is one of the most common cat diseases handled in a small
animal practice. Untreated, the abscess may rupture, drain, and heal over 2 to 3 weeks.
However, the treatment of choice is liberal surgical drainage and thorough flushing of the
area with saline or chlorhexidine solution together with systemic antibiotics for 5 to 7

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 3 I I

FIGURE 4-13. Facial abscess secondary to a tooth root
abscess.

days. P. multocida with rare exception is susceptible to the penicillins (penicillin, amoxicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate), and these are the drugs of choice in known bite wounds. If
there is a poor response to the initial medication or the abscess is not due to a bite
wound, cytologic or cultural procedures should be taken to identify the offending
organism.
Castration of intact male cats has been a helpful preventive measure, resulting in
either rapid or gradual decline in fighting and roaming behavior to 80% to 90% of the
cats so treated.P" Recurrent or nonhealing feline abscesses should prompt a consideration
of immunosuppression (feline leukemia virus infection or feline immunodeficiency virus
infection), and other infectious agents (Actinomyces spp., Nocardia spp., Yersinia pestis,
and mycobacteria), mycoses, or sterile panniculitis. Many anaerobic organisms can be
found in feline abscesses.P"- 248-251 Mycoplasma and Mycoplasma-like organisms (discussion follows in this chapter) have been isolated from cats with chronic subcutaneous
abscesses.
Rhodococcus (Corynebacterium) equi and Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis have
been isolated from the feet and subcutaneous abscesses in the cat. 98 , 132, 159. 187 Internal
organ involvement can occur with either organism, especially if the cat is immunosuppressed. Cytologically, a pyogranulomatous reaction is visible with gram-positive coccoid to
coccobacillary bacteria within clear cytoplasmic spaces in macrophages." Treatment is best
determined by culture and susceptibility testing, but amoxicillin clavulanate is usually
effective.

Bacterial Pseudomycetoma
Bacterial pseudomycetoma (cutaneous bacterial granuloma or botryomycosis) is a chronic,
suppurative, granulomatous disease caused by nonbranching bacteria. They form grains of
compact colonies in tissues that are surrounded by pyogranulomatous inflammation.S 274
Bacterial pseudomycetoma is common in many species but is rarely reported, probably
because it is misdiagnosed or overlooked. The causative bacteria are usually coagulasepositive staphylococci, but in some cases other bacteria, alone or associated with staphylo-

3 I2 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
cocci, may be responsible. There may be Pseudomonas spp., Proteus spp., Streptococcus
spp., and Actinobacillus spp. In cases involving dogs and cats, multiple organisms can be
found. 274
Most cases are initiated by local trauma from bites or other wounds, and some are
associated with a foreign body. There may also be muscle or bone involvement. The
granuloma develops because a delicate balance exists between the virulence of the organisms and the response of the host. The host is able to isolate and contain the infection
but is unable to eradicate it. This may also be a type of bacterial hypersensitivity, or the
grain formation may be associated with the formation of a polysaccharide slime coating 15 1
produced by the bacteria or with a glycoprotein covering resulting from a localized
antigen-antibody reaction on the surface of the microorganisms.
Clinically, the lesions appear as firm, solitary or multiple nodules with draining fistulae
(see Fig. 4-12G). The purulent exudate may have small white granules similar to grains
of sand (see Fig. 4-12H). Special bacterial and fungal stains are necessary to differentiate
the granules from those found in actinomycosis, nocardiosis, or mycetomas.
Histopathologically, there is a nodular to diffuse dermatitis and/or panniculitis, with
tissue granules surrounded by a granulomatous to pyogranulomatous infiltrate of histiocytes, plasma cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils, and multinucleate histiocytic giant cells (Fig.
4-14). The edges of the bacteria masses (granules) may show clubbing and may stain
brightly eosinophilic with H & E (Hoeppli-Splendore material). The bacteria are best
demonstrated with Gram's tissue stain or Brown-Brenn stain (Fig. 4-15).
Differential diagnosis must include actinomycosis, nocardiosis, eumycotic mycetoma,
systemic mycoses, dermatophytic pseudomycetoma, foreign body reactions, and chronic
bacterial abscesses. Because of the variable prognoses and therapeutic formats, a specific
diagnosis is imperative.
Simple systemic antibiotic therapy is usually not adequate. Frequent relapses are the
rule. Therapy for isolated lesions is complete surgical excision because the granulomatous
mass is relatively impermeable to antibiotics.P- 274 With large numbers of lesions, cotreatment with rifampin and ,B-Iactamase-resistant antibiotic may be effective.

Mycobacterial Granulomas
Mycobacteria can be divided into three groups: obligate pathogens such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and M. lepraemurium, which do not multiply outside vertebrate hosts; facultative pathogens, which normally exist as saprophytes in the environment but sporadically
cause disease; and environmental saprophytes, which almost never cause disease.v 180
Mycobacteria and the disease syndromes they cause can be further classified as follows:
1. True tuberculosis mycobacteria. M. tuberculosis, both bovine and human types,
cause small animal tuberculosis in endemic areas. They are photochromogenic and
slow growers, and if injected into guinea pigs, cause death in 6 to 8 weeks;
opportunistic mycobacteria do not (see discussion that follows).
2. Leprosy mycobacteria. M. lepraemurium causes rat leprosy, which is possibly transmitted to small animals. It is scotochromogenic and grows with great difficulty in
the laboratory. Many acid-fast organisms are usually found in histologic sections
(see Feline Leprosy in this chapter).
3. Opportunistic mycobacteria. These can be divided into groups according to their
rate of growth and pigment production. One group of slow-growing organisms
(longer than 7 days) is nonchromogenic and pathogenic only to cold-blooded
animals. Another group of slow-growing mycobacteria of this group include M.
kansasii, M. marinum, M. ulcerans, and M. avium and are facultative pathogens.
The fast-growing (2 to 3 days, or less than 7 days) mycobacteria in the atypical, or
opportunistic, group include M. fortuitum, M. chelonei, M. thermoresistible, M.
xenopi, M. phlei, and M. smegmatis. Organisms may be scattered through tissues,
necessitating a careful search. They are often found in small vacuoles in the
granulomatous tissue (see Opportunistic Mycobacterial Granulomas in this chap-

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 3 I 3

FIGURE 4-14. Bacterial pseudomycetoma. Pyogranulomatous
dermatitis with multiple tissue
grains.

ter). Natural water may be teaming with saprophytic mycobacteria, including some
that are facultative or opportunistic pathogens. These can produce infection after
contamination when predisposing factors are present. In attempts to isolate and to
identify individual species, decontamination of saprophytes from cultures, differentiation by biochemical tests, and immunodiffusion analysis are difficult. 2

In one cat with cutaneous mycobacteriosis, the histopathological findings resembled
fibrosarcoma, and no granulomatous inflammation was seen. 202a

FIGURE 4-15. Bacterial pseudomycetoma. Same sample under
Brown-Brenn stain. The clusters of
cocci are visible.

3 14 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

TUBERCULOSIS: M. TUBERCULOSIS AND M. BOVIS
The incidence of "true" tuberculosis in dogs and cats decreased with the decrease of the
disease in humans and cattle but may be becoming more prevalent owing to an increasing
frequency in humans.P? It is a rare disease in most parts of the world unless pets
experience a high degree of exposure.2. 50. 59. 82. ISla, 170 Animals that live where there are
large numbers of people (restaurants or public places), have close contact with an infected
owner (e.g., sleeping in the sick person's room), or are fed a variety of unprocessed meat
or milk from areas of endemic disease have an increased chance of infection. Although
both dogs and cats are susceptible to both M. tuberculosis and M. bovis, there appears to
be a higher incidence of M. bovis infection in cats. 82 The predominant lesions in small
animals are respiratory and digestive, but there can be some skin lesions. In cats, clinical
signs may be insidious, and because diagnostic tests are unreliable, epidemiologic data are
of questionable validity.248, 260
Clinical Features

Cutaneous lesions are single or multiple ulcers, abscesses, plaques, and nodules. Nodules
may be in the skin or adherent to subcutaneous tissues. They fail to come to a head and
may discharge a thick, yellow to green pus with an unpleasant odor. The lesions are most
common on the head, the neck, and the limbs. Patients usually appear sick; they have
anorexia, weight loss, fever, and lymphadencpathy.i- 50,59,82
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is by history, physical examination, radiography, biopsy, culture, bacille Calmette-Cuerin (BCG) or purified protein derivative (PPD) test (in dogs)," serologic testing,
or lymphocyte blastogenesis test (in cats),156 Biopsy specimens may show a nodular-todiffuse dermatitis due to pyogranulomatous inflammation (with necrosis and caseation),
rare multinucleate histiocytic giant cells and mineralization, and few to many acid-fast
organisms. Smears or biopsy do not differentiate between true tuberculosis and opportunistic mycobacterial granulomas. Injection of cultures into guinea pigs causes death in 6 to
8 weeks, but not if the organism is nontuberculous.
BCG or PPD (250 tuberculin units/O.l ml) prepared for humans can be used to test
dogs for tuberculosis. Intradermal injection (0.1 ml of PPD or 0.1 to 0.2 ml of BCG) is
best performed on the inner surface of the pinna and is read at 48 to 72 hours (no
sooner). Erythema that resorbs by that time is a negative test result. Severe erythema with
central necrosis progressing to ulceration at 10 to 14 days is Significant. Ulceration after 18
to 21 days may occur in normal dogs. This testing is unreliable in the cat.

TUBERCULOSIS: UNNAMED VARIANT
Multiple cases of tuberculosis caused by an organism with cultural characteristics between
M. tuberculosis and M. bovis have been reported in the cat. 31, 116
Clinical Features

Affected cats typically experience nonhealing, nodular skin lesions on the face, chest wall,
legs, base of tail, or perineum.l'" Historically, many involved cats are hunters and the
distribution of the lesions supports wounding as the route of inoculation. The nodules may
or may not ulcerate, and the regional lymph nodes enlarge. Involvement of lungs and
visceral lymph nodes is reported.": 116 Systemic signs of illness occur with generalized
disease.
Diagnosis

Differentiation of this disorder from true tuberculosis or the other mycobacterial disorders
to be discussed requires culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis.l'"

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 3 I 5

TUBERCULOSIS: M. AVIUM
M. avium is a slow-growing environmental saprophyte. Dogs and cats were thought
to be relatively resistant to infection, 50. 148, 263 but more and more cases are being reported.P" 149, 166, 262 Clustering of cases within breeds (Basset hounds.t" Siamese cats 148 )
and within an individual family of miniature Schnauzers" suggests a genetic predisposition
with immunologic manifestations.
Clinical Features

Affected animals may present for signs of respiratory and/or gastrointestinal disease,
generalized lymphadenopathy, or nodular skin disease with regional lymphadenopathy.
Diagnosis

Because the organisms tend to be numerous, they may be visible in aspirates of masses, in
white blood cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow, and in various tissues.I'" 263 In
specimens stained with Wright's stain, the organism is rod-shaped, refractile, and nonstaining. Acid-fast stains are needed to highlight the organism. Differentiation of this organism
from other mycobacterial species requires culture or PCR.
Clinical Management of Tuberculosis

Dogs and cats with true tuberculosis can be a point source of infection for humans and
other animals and should be destroyed. The public health significance of the unnamed
variant is unknown. Because M. avium is abundant in the environment, treatment of
infected animals is reasonable provided that all contact individuals are immunologically
normal and excellent hygiene is practiced.
Most details on the treatment of M. avium tuberculosis are found for the cat. 116. 117
For maximum efficacy, the intercurrent use of two, preferably three, drugs is suggested
for a minimum of 6 to 9 months. Classic drug combinations involve the use of rifampicin
(10-20 mglkg qI2-24h), isoniazid (10-20 mglkg q24h), and ethambutol (15 mglkg
q24h). Other potentially useful drugs include clarithromycin (5-10 mglkg qI2h), clofazimine (2-8.5 mglkg q24h), doxycycline (10 mglkg qI2h), enrofloxacin (5 mglkg q24h,
provided M. avium is not being treated), and dapsone (2 mglkg q24h). Again, two or
three of these alternative drugs should be used Simultaneously.
The course of treatment is long and should be continued long after all clinical signs of
disease are resolved.

FELINE LEPROSY
Feline leprosy is a granulomatous, nodular, cutaneous infection with an acid-fast organism
that is impossible to culture.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Since its recognition, feline leprosy has been known to be caused by a mycobacterium,
but specific identification of the causative organism was delayed because of cultural
difficulties. Transmission studies with fresh tissues from affected cats into rats and mice
supported the role of M. lepraemurium as the etiologic agent. 2 , 243 In 1997, PCR gene
sequencing identified M. lepraemurium as the causative agent in four of eight cats with
presumptive leprosy.F' In one of the four remaining cases, co-infection with M. avium
and M. chitae was documented. Two other cats were infected with a species that most
closely resembles M. malrrwense. If these data are substantiated in other studies, more
details on such factors as the mode of transmission can be ascertained.
The disease has been reported in New Zealand, Australia, Great Britain, France, Italy,
the Netherlands, the United States, and Canada. Typically, clinical disease has a long
incubation period with recognition of disease during winter after exposure during sum-

3 16 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

mer. 184 Live M. leprae (leprosy bacillus of humans) has been found in mosquitos, fleas,
and ticks, and these vectors may be important in the feline disease.
Clinical Features

Lesions are single or multiple cutaneous nodules, which mayor may not be ulcerated.
Lesions are most common on the head or extremities. There may be abscesses or fistulae
that show no signs of healing (Fig. 4-16A) but do not spread. Lesions also have been
found on the nasal, buccal, and lingual mucosae. Regional lymphadenopathy is common,
although without local pain or systemic illness. There is no sex prevalence, but two thirds
of cases occur in cats 1 to 3 years of age.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is confirmed on the basis of history, physical examination results, and the
finding of acid-fast bacilli in direct smears and biopsy specimens (Ziehl-Neelsen stain or
Fite-Faraco modification). Tissue homogenates should be cultured on the surface of 1%
Ogawa egg yolk medium" and also inoculated into guinea pigs to eliminate the diagnosis
of tuberculosis. Specific identification requires PCR sequencing from tissue specimens.
Histopathologic examination may reveal two types of reactions. One is the tuberculoid
response with caseous necrosis and relatively few organisms, and the organisms are often
only in the areas of necrosis. These epithelioid granulomas are usually surrounded by
zones of lymphocytes, which are also commonly aggregated around vessels (Fig. 4-17).
The second type of reaction (lepromatous leprosy) is a granuloma composed of solid
sheets of large foamy macrophages containing significant numbers of acid-fast bacilli. The
organisms are clustered in globi in a parallel stacking arrangement. Multinucleate histiocytic giant cells often contain bacilli, and lymphocytes and plasma cells may surround
vessels (Fig. 4-18). Many polymorphonuclear leukocytes may be present and may cause
the lesion to resemble a pyogranuloma.
Differential diagnostic considerations include tuberculosis; granulomas due to opportunistic mycobacteria or foreign bodies; mycotic infections such as kerion, mycetoma, and
phaeohyphomycosis; chronic bacterial infection; and neoplasms such as mast cell tumors,
carcinomas, and lymphoreticular tumors.
Clinical Management

Although lesions may resolve spontaneously.F" surgical excision is the treatment of choice
when there are solitary or circumscribed lesions. When surgery fails or is impractical,
chemotherapy with dapsone, rifampin, or clofazimine mayor may not be successful (see
discussion of opportunistic mycobacteria).

CANINE LEPROSY
In the 1970s, a nodular skin disease of dogs from Zimbabwe was reported that had many
similarities to feline leprosy. Affected animals usually had lesions on their head or extremities and were healthy beyond their skin; they had easily visible mycobacterium in biopsy
samples, but cultural and transmission work failed to identify the organism; and surgical
treatment was curative. A study published in 1998 on 45 dogs from Australia sheds more
light on the disorder.!"
Cause and Pathogenesis

Although mycobacteria are easily visible in tissue samples, cultures are always negative.
Because the true tuberculoid and opportunistic mycobacteria are easily cultured whereas
those of feline leprosy are not, one or more unusual species of mycobacteria are probably
causal. PCR gene sequencing is needed to identify the organism.
The data from the Australian study have many similarities to data concerning the
feline disorder. The majority (84%) of affected dogs have lesions on their head and/or
pinna, 93% of dogs have a short coat, and the majority of dogs experience their lesions in
fall or winter. These data suggest that the organism is transmitted by biting flies.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 3 I 7

FIGURE 4-16. A, Ulcerated lesion of feline leprosy on the face of a cat. (Courtesy of G.T. Wilkinson.) B,
Multiple necrotic granulomatous lesions on the body of a cat associated with M. fortuitum infection. C, Soft tissue
infection with draining fistulae on the thorax of a dog with atypical mycobacterial granulomas due to M. chelonei.
(Courtesy G.A. Kunkle.) D, Atypical mycobacteriosis (with panniculitis) on the abdomen of a cat. E, Feline atypical
mycobacteriosis. Note numerous acid-fast organisms within dermal macrophages (Fite-Faraco stain). F, Nonhealing
ulcer with suppurative discharge over the shoulder of a dog with actinomycosis. G, Actinomycosis. Eosinophilic
(Hoeppli-Splendore phenomenon) tissue grain (sulfur granule) in pyogranulomatous dermatitis. H, Cutaneous nocardiosis (with panniculitis) in a cat.

3 I 8 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-17. Granulomatous inflammation of dermis in a cat. Epidermis intact (H & E
stain). (From Schiefer E, et aI: A disease resembling feline leprosy in western Canada. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 165:1085, 1974.)

FIGURE 4-18. Histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm and giant cells (H & E stain). (From

Schiefer E, et al: A disease resembling feline leprosy in western Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc
165:1085, 1974.)

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 3 I 9

Clinical Features

Affected dogs usually are short-coated and have one or more asymptomatic nodules on
their head, especially on the pinna, varying in size from several millimeters to 5 em in
diameter. Large lesions may ulcerate. Regional lymph nodes are not enlarged, and there
are no systemic signs of illness.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is confirmed on the basis of history, physical examination results, and the
finding of acid-fast bacilli in direct smears and biopsy specimens. Histopathologic findings
include pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with variable numbers of multinucleated histiocytic giant cells and very few to numerous bacteria.P" Differential diagnosis
includes the sterile pyogranuloma syndrome, granulomas due to foreign bodies or other
infectious agents, and neoplasms such as mast cell tumors, histiocytic tumors, or lymphoma.
Clinical Management

Surgical excision of individual lesions is curative. Beyond surgery, treatment recommendations are difficult to make because spontaneous resolution of lesions is reported. In the
Australian study, six dogs underwent self-cure whereas 13 were reported cured with either
doxycycline (n = 8) or amoxicillin clavulanate (n = 5). Some of the cures attributed to
the drugs may have been spontaneous remissions.
If insect vectors are important, some dogs can be expected to experience new lesions.

OPPORTUNISTIC MYCOBACTERIAL GRANULOMAS
Opportunistic mycobacterial granulomas (atypical mycobacterial granulomas) in dogs and
cats can be caused by several atypical mycobacteria that are facultative pathogens. The
disease is characterized by chronicity, resistance to antibiotics and antituberculosis drugs,
and possible spontaneous resolution.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Organisms reported to cause cutaneous granulomas in dogs and cats include Mycobacterium fortuitum, M. chelonei, M. phlei, M. xenopi, M. thermoresistible, and M. smegmatis," Because M. fortuitum and M. chelonei share several metabolic characteristics and
are facultative pathogens that produce similar clinical signs, they may be called the M.
fortuitum-chelonei complex. The disease has been reported most commonly in cats (perhaps because infection may be introduced through cat bite wounds), but cases in dogs
have been recorded.v 106, 110, 111, 162,267
These mycobacteria are ubiquitous, free-living organisms that are usually harmless and
are commonly found in nature. They are found in the soil, but they especially favor water
tanks, swimming pools, and sources of natural water.P" After injury or injection, animals
can experience chronic subcutaneous abscesses and fistulae due to these organisms. The
history of cases of these granulomas in humans commonly cites instances of the disease
after a contaminated injection or an infected wound.
Clinical Features

After contaminated injection, infection of a wound, or other trauma, the lesion develops
slowly during a period of weeks. The course is prolonged, and lesions often have been
present as nonhealing wounds for several months. Chronic soft tissue abscessation occurs,
with ulcers and draining fistulae (see Fig. 4-16B and C).
Lesions can occur anywhere but are most common in the cat in the caudal abdominal
or inguinal region 168 (see Fig. 4-16D) or in the lumbar region. The lesions mayor may
not be painful, and regional lymph nodes are not always enlarged. With solitary lesions,
systemic illness, such as fever and anorexia, is rarely observed, and the animal feels well.
'See references 2, 88, Ill, ISla, 162, 186, 191, 205, 264, 267, 270, 277, 284,

320 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
If the animal is immunosuppressed,106. 110. 137a. 205. 267 widespread skin lesions can develop
or the animal may experience sepsis with its accompanying signs of illness. 105a
One cat with a co-infection with an atypical mycobacterium and a Nocardia spp. had
a significant hypercalcemia associated with the granulomatous tissue reaction.P" Although
apparently rare, this case demonstrates that animals with granulomatous disorders should
have a complete and thorough evaluation.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is confirmed by finding acid-fast organisms in smears, cultures, or biopsy specimens (see Fig. 4-9E). The organism is often difficult to demonstrate. Smears made from
fine-needle aspirates of closed lesions are more likely to contain detectable organisms than
are those made from exudates or tissue samples.P" Cultures usually grow rapidly, but may
take weeks, and should be made on blood agar, Lowenstein-jensen medium, or Stonebrink's medium at 37°C (98.6°F).2. 15la Because cultures and biochemical tests for positive
identification may be complex, the laboratory handling the cultures should be informed
that a mycobacterial infection is suspected.
Histopathologic examination may be helpful. There is nodular to diffuse dermatitis,
panniculitis, or both due to pyogranulomatous inflammation. Stains such as Ziehl-Neelsen
or Fite-Faraco modification should be used, and a careful search may be needed to find
organisms (see Fig. 4-16E). They are often clumped in the center of a clear vacuole and
surrounded by clusters of neutrophils within the mature granuloma168 (Fig. 4-19). Alcohol
processing in paraffin embedding may cause the acid-fast organism to stain poorly.F"
Using rapid Ziehl-Neelsen stain or snap-freezing the formalin-fixed tissues with subsequent acid-fast stain enables the bacilli to be seen.
Clinical Management

The prognosis in opportunistic mycobacterial infection is always guarded, especially when
the lesions are large or multiple. Although spontaneous resolution of lesions can occur
after months to years of disease, most cases need treatment. In early cases wherein the
lesion is small, wide surgical excision with removal of all subjacent fat may be curative.
With large lesions, multiple lesions, or a relapse after surgery, surgery alone is not likely
to resolve the infection and an appropriate chemotherapeutic agent should be used longterm after surgery.
Opportunistic mycobacteria do not respond to antitubercular drugs, and susceptibility
to conventional antibiotics varies among and within the various species of organisms. 2

FIGURE 4-19. Atypical mycobacteriosus. Acid-fast organisms in
the center of a clear vacuole in pyogranulomatous panniculitis. (Courtesy T.L. Gross.)

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 321
Drug selection for each case should be based on cultural data. In the absence of individual susceptibility data, a response to tetracyclines, clarithromycin, or enrofloxacin may
occur.v 191, 196a. 264 The most successful antibiotics in cats appear to be doxycycline (5 mg!
kg q12h) or enrofloxacin (5 to 20 mgikg q24h).151a Clofazimine (2 to 8.5 mgikg q24h PO)
can be effective. Side effects to this drug are infrequent, include orange-red discoloration
of the skin, corneal pigmentation, gastrointestinal distress, pruritus, seborrhea sicca, and
are dose-related.I'" ISla, 191. 201, 208
To be successful, the chemotherapeutic agent is needed for months. The drug should
be administered until all clinical signs of disease are visually and palpably gone and then
for an additional 4 to 6 weeks.

Actinomycosis
Actinomycosis is a rare pyogranulomatous or suppurative disease of many species caused
by Actinomyces organisms. A. odontolyticus, A. viscosus, A. meyeri, and A. hordeovulneris
have been suggested as causes.v 15,36,89, ISla They are gram-positive, non-acid-fast, catalase-positive, filamentous anaerobic rods that are opportunistic, commensal inhabitants of
the oral cavity and the bowel.v 37. 153. 248 Infection occurs from trauma and contamination
of penetrating wounds, especially those involving foreign bodies such as awns and
quills. 89, 119. 153. 291 Hunting or field dogs in southern climates are most commonly affected.
It takes from months to 2 years for signs to develop after the injury; however, organisms
can be found in the exudate within 2 weeks. The typical clinical-lesion is a subcutaneous
swelling or abscess of the head or neck, thoracic, paralumbar, or abdominal region (see
Fig. 4-16F). The lesion is usually tender and mayor may not have draining tracts.
Paralumbar lesions are usually a direct extension from retroperitoneal involvement. Other
forms include osteomyelitis and empyema. Draining tracts (mycetoma-like) may discharge
a thick, yellowish-gray or thin, hemorrhagic, foul-smelling exudate that mayor may not
contain yellow sulfur granules.
Diagnosis is by anaerobic culture (may require 2 to 4 weeks), direct smears of fineneedle aspirates, and biopsy using special stains (Gram's, Brown-Brenn, or Comori's
methenamine silver). No method is completely reliable, and cytologic study appears to be
most effective.P" Histopathologic examination reveals nodular to diffuse dermatitis, panniculitis, or both due to suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation (Fig. 4-20).
Tissue grains (sulfur granules) are present in approximately 50% of cases. The granules
are basophilic and often have a clubbed, eosinophilic periphery (Hoeppli-Splendore material) (see Fig. 4-16G). The gram-positive, non-acid-fast, filamentous, occasionally beaded
organisms (Fig. 4-21) are found within the granules, but they are not easily visible in
ordinary H & E preparations. Actinomycosis must be differentiated from nocardiosis, a
disease that it closely resembles.
The most successful treatment involves surgical excision or debulkment with a long
course of antibiotics. High-dose penicillins (e.g., penicillin, amoxicillin, oxacillin) are
the optimal empirical treatment of choice.v ISla Other drugs that mayor may not be effective include clindamycin, erythromycin, cephalosporins, chloramphenicol, and tetracycline. 151a, 275 The treatment must continue for at least 1 month after complete remission
and usually lasts 3 to 4 months. Prognosis is guarded, with relapses reported to vary from
15% to 42%.153

Actinobacillosis
Actinobacillosis is a rare disease of several animal species caused by Actinobacillus lignieresii.? It resembles actinomycosis in many of its cutaneous manifestations, but the causative organism is a gram-negative, aerobic coccobacillus that does not survive for a long
time outside the host animal. It is a commensal organism found in the mouth of many
animals, and clinical lesions often follow bite wounds or injuries around the face and
mouth. Infection develops during weeks to months, and its course is long.
Clinical features include single or multiple thick-walled abscesses of the head, neck,

322 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-20. Actinomycosis in a dog. Note focal pyogranuloma with two tissue grains
(arrows).

mouth, and limbs.v They discharge a thick, white to green, odorless pus with soft yellow
granules. Diagnosis is based on aerobic cultures of pus, direct smears, or biopsy of
affected tissues.
Histopathologic examination reveals a nodular to diffuse dermatitis, panniculitis, or
both due to suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation. Tissue grains (sulfur granules)
are usually present. The grains are basophilic and usually surrounded by eosinophilic
Hoeppli-Splendore material. Special stains (Gram's or Brown-Brenn) are required to
demonstrate the gram-negative organisms.
Clinical management includes surgical extirpation or drainage and curettage. Sodium
iodide (20 mglkg or 0.2 mlJkg of 20% solution, orally q12h) and high doses of streptomycin or sulfonamides have been suggested for therapy. The organism is also usually sensi-

FIGURE 4-21. Actinomycosis.
Gram-positive, non-add-fast, filamentous organisms.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 323

tive to tetracycline and chloramphenicol. The course is long, and the prognosis is
guarded. 45

Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is a rare disease characterized by pyogranulomatous and suppurative infection of the skin or the lungs or by widespread dissemination. It is caused by Nocardia
Spp.2,97, 151a, 153, 190 The organisms involved, including N. asteroides, N. brasiliensis, and N.
caviae, are common soil saprophytes that produce infection by wound contamination,
inhalation, and ingestion, particularly in immunocompromised animals. Nocardia are grampositive, partially acid-fast, branching filamentous aerobes. Except for N. brasiliensis, their
geographic distribution is worldwide.
Nocardia nova was isolated in pure culture from cats with cutaneous swelling and
draining tracts.P> N. nova, N. asteroides, and N. farcinica previously formed the N.
asteroides complex. The distinguishing characteristics that separate these three species are
the types of cell wall mycolic acids and the antimicrobial susceptibility patterns. The
authors speculated that N. nova may be the main species affecting cats.
Clinical features are indistinguishable from those seen in actinomycosis and include
cellulitis, ulcerated nodules, and abscesses that often develop draining sinuses (see Fig. 416H). Lesions typically occur in areas of wounding, especially on the limbs and feet, and
are often accompanied by lymphadenopathy. Cats often have lesions on the ventral abdomen that resemble panniculitis or opportunistic mycobacterial infection. Pyothorax may be
present along with other systemic signs, such as weakness, anorexia, fever, depression, and
dyspnea, and neurologic signs may be present.v 71, 153, 190 Hypercalcemia may be present
and influence the animal's renal function.P'"
Diagnosis is by direct smear of fine-needle aspirates, aerobic culture, and biopsy.
Histopathologic study reveals nodular to diffuse dermatitis, panniculitis, or both, with or
without tissue grains (Fig. 4-22). Special stains (Gram's and Brown-Brenn) are needed to
demonstrate organisms. Nocardia spp. can be distinguished from Actinomyces spp. because they are partially acid-fast (with modified Fite-Faraco stain) and usually branch at
right angles (Fig. 4-23). When branched and beaded, the organisms appear similar to
Chinese characters.
Clinical management includes surgical drainage of infected tissues, but antibacterial
therapy is mandatory. Nocardial organisms show varying susceptibility to antibiotics, and
the correlation between in vivo and in vitro results varies.v 1.51a, 1.53 For instance, N. nova is

FIGURE 4-22. Nocardiosis, Tissue grain in pyogranulomatous dermatitis,

324 • Bacterial Skin Diseases

FIGURE 4-23. Nocardiosis. Partially acid-fast, filamentous organisms
thattend to branch at right angles.

susceptible to the macrolides, and often to the penicillins, while N. asteroides is resistant
to the macrolides and, often, to the penicillins. 133a N. nova isolates are usually susceptible
to ampicillin, but not amoxicillin clavulanate. If at all possible, susceptibility data should
be developed for each case. If the organism cannot be isolated, drugs that can be effective
empirically include potentiated sulfonamide drugs, enrofloxacin, amoxicillin clavulanate,
ampicillin alone or in combination with erythromycin, clarithromycin, cephalosporins,
chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, and various parenteral drugS.151a Treatment must be continued for at least 1 month after clinical remission. Prognosis is guarded.

• MISCELLANEOUS BACTERIAL INFECTIONS

Streptococcal and Staphylococcal Necrotizing Fasciitis
A streptococcal toxic shock syndrome with a rapidly progressive course has been described
in seven dogs.202 Group C streptococci, especially S. canis, are responsible for the disorder. 87a Infected dogs experience rapid development of sepsis and shock or sepsis and
necrotizing fasciitis. With the necrotizing fasciitis, the wound is disproportionately painful,
with significant local heat and swelling. As the infected exudate travels along fascial planes,
the fascia, fat, and overlying skin become necrotic.
It is unclear why the streptococci in these cases became so toxic to their host dogs. If
a subset of the streptococcal population is developing virulence, additional cases will be
recognized. Recent work suggests that the emergence of these syndromes is not the result
of clinical expansion of one or more highly virulent strains of S. canisF": Most strains of S.
canis from dogs with these syndromes are positive for M protein and streptolysin 0,
which are probably virulence factors.F'' The toxic shock syndrome should be suspected
when a dog has a rapidly progressive, intensely painful wound with deep necrosis. After
diagnostic samples are taken, treatment with a macrolide or 13-lactam antibiotic should be
initiated until the culture results are available. Histopathologic findings include severe
necrosis and suppuration and extensive edema and hemorrhage of the dermis and subcutis. Thrombosed blood vessels, with or without vasculitis, and colonies of cocci within the
necrotic exudate are visible. The area of fasciitis requires debridement. With aggressive
treatment, the disorder may not be fatal.
Cellulitis and toxic shock was recently reported in a dog in association with Staphylo-

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 325
coccus intermedius infection.P" This is not surprising, given the ability of some strains of
S. intermedius to produce one or more exotoxins similar to those that produce toxic shock
in humans.P"

Brucellosis
Brucellosis is a systemic bacterial infection caused by Brucella canis. 2 Despite widespread
dissemination in the body, systemic signs of illness are rare, as are skin lesions. Brucellosis
may produce a secondary scrotal dermatitis (see Fig. 8-11D) resulting from the animal's
licking the skin over painful epididymitis and orchltis.P" Some cases may involve necrosis
of the testis, with severe inflammation of the entire scrotum, and draining ulcers. B. canis
has been isolated from the exudate.s'"
B. canis has also been isolated from a I5-month-old female laboratory Beagle with
chronic exudative lesions that resembled acral lick dermatitis.P During a period of 16
months, expanding painful lesions developed on both hocks and the dorsum of the right
carpus. The lesions were hyperemic, edematous, and granulomatous, with an irregularly
pitted surface. A sanguinopurulent exudate was present, and the regional lymph nodes
were enlarged. Histologic examination revealed dermal, subcutaneous, and tendinous
edema; pronounced lymphoid nodules; a prominent infiltration of macrophages, plasma
cells, and lymphocytes; and scattered neutrophils. The enlarged lymph nodes were characterized by sinusoid histiocytosis and medullary cord plasmacytosis. These findings are
typical of the tissue response to Brucella infection." Diagnosis is supported by serologic
examination findings and confirmed by culture."
Treatment of canine brucellosis should not be undertaken lightly because the infection can spread to humans and is not easily eradicated in the dog. 2 Affected dogs should
be removed from breeding programs and neutered if possible. Although the organism
shows in vitro sensitivity to tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, spectinomycin,
rifampin, ampicillin, sulfonamides, and the quinolones, relapses are common when a
specific drug is used individually for a single course of treatment. The highest rate of
success involves the use of multiple drugs. Synergism between the tetracyclines and
fluoroquinolones and the aminoglycosides and sulfonamides has been demonstrated.

Plague
Plague is an acute, febrile, infectious disease that has a high mortality rate and is caused
by the gram-negative organism Yersinia pestis, a bipolar coccobacillus of the family Enterobacteriaceae.f It is a facultative anaerobic, nonmotile, non-spore-forming organism
that cannot penetrate unbroken skin but can invade mucous membranes. Plague occurs in
three forms: bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic.P" 96 The most common is bubonic
plague, in which localized abscesses form near the site of infection (especially the head
and neck). The septicemic and pneumonic forms are more serious because they may be
undiagnosed until it is too late for effective treatment.
The incubation period is 1 to 3 days if the organism is ingested or inhaled, 2 to 6
days if the organisms enter through a flea bite, a skin wound, or a mucous membrane.
The course is fulminating and can lead to death. Plague exists in every continent except
Australia.s There have been outbreaks in all states of the United States west of the Rocky
Mountains, including Hawaii. Rodents and cats are highly susceptible, dogs are less
susceptible, and other domestic animals are resistant. It primarily affects rodents, especially prairie dogs, rock and ground squirrels, and rats. 2• 93
Plague typically is transmitted by fleas or by ingestion of infected animals. Diamanus
rrwntanus and four less common rodent-hosted fleas are the primary vectors. The common dog and cat fleas are not normally involved.F"
An epizootic plague can develop if susceptible rodents come in contact with the
Yersinia organisms, causing a massive die-off in the rodent colony. The sick rodents
become easy prey for cats, dogs, or other carnivores, and the fleas seek new hosts. Cats
can spread the infection to humans by transmitting infected fleas mechanically, by bring-

328 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
Based on susceptibility data, the dog was treated with clindamycin for 20 days with
complete resolution of the infestation.
Melioidosis
Melioidosis is an infectious nodular skin disorder of dogs and cats in Southeast Asia,
northern Australia, and the South Pacific caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei? The
organism is a soil saprophyte, and infection occurs by inhalation, arthropod bite, or wound
contamination. Affected animals have multiple small skin nodules that will rupture. Systemic involvement is also possible, Diagnosis is by culture, PCR techniques, or immunohistochemistry. Treatment involves surgical drainage of large lesions and protracted
courses of antibiotics. Oral drugs that can be effective include tetracycline, cWoramphenicol, amoxicillin clavulanate, and potentiated sulfonamides.
Pseudopyodermas
There is a group of dermatoses of variable etiology that are not pyodermas, although they
resemble them. The group includes the following:
1. Callus pyoderma (see Chap. 16)
2. Juvenile cellulitis (see Chap. 18)
3. Other pyoderma-like dermatoses
a. Acne (see Chap. 14)
b. Intertrigo (fold dermatitis) (see Chap. 16)
c. Linear IgA pustular dermatosis (see Chap. 9)
d. Sterile panniculitis (see Chap. 18)
e. Pemphigus erythematosus (see Chap. 9)
f. Pemphigus foliaceus (see Chap. 9)
g. Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis (see Chap. 18)
h. Sterile pyogranuloma syndrome (see Chap. 18)
i. Subcorneal pustular dermatosis (see Chap. 18)
j. Eosinophilic facial folliculitis and furunculosis (see Chap. 8)

• REFERENCES
General
1. Arrioja-Dechert A (ed): Compendium of Veterinary
Products, 5th ed. North American Compendiums,
Inc., Port Huron, 1999.
2. Greene CE: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1998.
3. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CE: Muller and
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995.

Specific
4. Aarestrup FM, Jacobsen MJ: Bakteriel paronychia
(klovolds-betaendelse) hos kat forarsaget of Staphylococcus felis. Dansk Vet 76:1066, 1993.
5. Ackerman L: Cutaneous bacterial granuloma (botryomycosis) in five dogs: Treatment with rifampin. Mod
Vet Pract 68:404, 1987.
6. Allaker RP, et al: Occurrence of Staphylococcus intermedius on the hair and skin of normal dogs. Res Vet
Sci 5:174, 1992.
7. Allaker RP, et al: Colonization of neonatal puppies by
staphylococci. Br Vet J 148:523, 1992.
8. Allaker RP, et al: Population sizes and frequency of
staphylococci at mucocutaneous sites in healthy dogs.
Vet Rec 130:303, 1992.

9. Ambrose NC, et al: Preliminary characterization of
extracellular serine proteases of Dermatophilus congolensis isolates from cattle, sheep, and horses. Vet Micro 62:321, 1998.
10. Angarano OW, MacDonald JM: Efficacy of cefadroxil
in the treatment of bacterial dermatitis in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 194:57, 1989.
11. Appel MJG: Lyme disease in dogs and cats. Comp
Cont Educ 12:617, 1990.
12. Appel MJG, et al: Experimental lyme disease in dogs
produces arthritis and persistent infection. J Infect
Dis 167:651, 1993.
13. Armstrong JP: Systemic Serratia marcescens infections in a dog and a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:
1143, 1984.
14. Ascher F, et al: Controlled trial of ethyl lactate and
benzoyl peroxide shampoos in the management of
canine surface pyoderma and superficial pyoderma.
In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere-Tindall,
London, 1990, p 375.
15. Aucoin DP: Intracellular-intraphagocytic dynamics of
fluoroquinolone antibiotics: A comparative review.
Comp Cont Ed 18:9, 1996.
16. Awad-Masalmeh VM, et al: Bakteriologische Untersu-

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 329
chungen zur Pyodermie des Hundes Therapeutischen
Einsatzeiner autogenen Vakzin. Wien Tierrztl Mschr.
75:232, 1986.
17. Ayliffe TR: Penetration of tissue by antibiotics. Br Vet
Dennatol Newsl 5:233, 1980.
18. Baldi PC, et al: Diagnosis of canine brucellosis by
detection of serum antibodies against and 18kDa cytoplasmic protein of Brucella spp. Vet Micro 57:273,
1997.
19. Barrs VR, et al: Antimicrobial susceptibility of various
staphylococci isolated from various disease conditions
in dogs: A further survey. Aust Vet Practit 25:37,
1995.
20. Barthold SW, et al: Serologic response of dogs naturally exposed to or vaccinated against Borrelia burgdorfiei infection. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1435,
1995.
21. Becker AM, et al: Propionibacterium acnes immunotherapy in chronic recurrent canine pyoderma. J Vet
Intern Med 3:26, 1989.
22. Bell A: Prophylaxis of Gennan shepherd recurrent
furunculosis (Gennan shepherd dog pyoderma) using
cephalexin pulse therapy. Aust Vet Practit 25:30,
1995.
23. Benard P, et al: Diffusion cutanee de la lincomycine:
Observations chez un chien par autohistoradiograhie.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:415, 1995.
24. Benson CE: Susceptibility of selected otitis externa
pathogens to individual and mixtures of acetic and
boric acid. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dennatol Am Coli Vet DennatoI14:121, 1998.
25. Berg IN, et al: The occurrence of anaerobic bacteria
in diseases of the dog and cat. Am J Vet Res 40:877,
1979.
26. Berg IN, et al: Clinical models for anaerobic bacterial
infection in dogs and their use in testing the efficacy
of clindamycin and lincomycin. Am J Vet Res 45:
1299, 1984.
27. Berg IN, et al: Identification of the major coagulasepositive Staphylococcus spp. of dogs as Staphylococcus intermedius. Am J Vet Res 45:1307, 1984.
28. Berger SL, et al: A quantitative study of the effects of
tribrissen on canine tear production. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 31:236, 1995.
29. Bettenay SV, et al: Doxycycline hydrochloride in the
treatment of canine pyoderma. Aust Vet Pract 28:14,
1998.
30. Blum JR, et al: The clinical manifestations of a genetically determined deficiency in the third component
of complement in the dog. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 34:304, 1985.
31. Blunden AS, Smith KC: A pathological study of a
mycobacterial infection in a cat caused by a variant
with cultural characteristics between Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and M. bovis. Vet Rec 138:87, 1996.
32. Boothe DM: Avoiding antibiotic failures in your skin
patients. Comp Cont Ed 19:101, 1997.
33. Bourdeau P: Treatment of canine pyodennas with an
oral long-acting association: baquiloprim + sulphadimethoxine (Zaquilan). In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dennatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 541.
34. Breitschwerdt EB: Laboratory diagnosis of tick-transmitted diseases in the dog. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura
JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 252.
35. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Rhinitis, pneumonia, and defective neutrophil function in the Doberman pinscher.
Am J Vet Res 48:1054, 1987.

36. Buchanan AM, Scott JL: Actinomyces hordeovulneris,
a canine pathogen that produces L-phase variants
spontaneously with coincident calcium deposition. Am
J Vet Res 54:2552, 1984.
37. Buchanan AM, et al: Nocardia asteroides recovery
from a dog with steroid- and antibiotic-unresponsive
idiopathic polyarthritis. J Clin MicrobioI18:702, 1983.
38. Buck GE, et al: Isolation of a corynebacterium from
beagle dogs affected with alopecia. Am J Vet Res 35:
297,1974.
39. Burkett G, Frank LA: Comparison of production of
Staphylococcus intermedius exotoxin among clinically
normal dogs, atopic dogs with recurrent pyoderma,
and dogs with a single episode of pyodenna. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 213:232, 1998.
40. Burrows AK: Residual antimicrobial action of 2% mupirocin ointment (Bactodenn). Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol Am Coli Vet Dennatol
10:35, 1994.
41. Campbell KL, et al: Immunoglobulin A deficiency in
the dog. Canine Pract 16:7, 1991.
42. Campbell KL: Sulphonamides: Updates on use in veterinary medicine. Vet DennatollO:205, 1999.
43. Caprile KA: Maintenance antibacterial agents in recurrent pyodenna. Vet Med Rep 2:297, 1990.
44. Carakostas MC, et al: Subcutaneous dennatophilosis
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:675, 1984.
45. Carb AV, Liu SK: Actinobacillus lignieresii infection
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 154:1062, 1969.
45a. Carli S, et al: Absorption kinetics and bioavailability
of cephalexin in dogs after oral and intramuscular
administration. J Vet Phannacol Therap 22:308,
1999.
46. Carlotti DN, Atanu A: Treatment of 13 cases of
chronic deep pyoderma with rifampin in dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol 13:120,
1997.
47. Carlotti DN, Leroy S: Actualites en antibiotherapie
cutanee systemique chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 30:263, 1995.
48. Carlotti DN, et al: Utilisation de la marbofloxacine
dans Ie traitement des pyodennites du chien. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 30:281, 1995.
49. Carlotti DN, Maffart P: La chlorhexidine: revue bibliographique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:553,
1996.
50. Carpenter JL, et al: Tuberculosis in five basset
hounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1563, 1988.
51. Carro T, et al: Subcutaneous abscesses and arthritis
caused by a probable bacterial L-fonn in cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 194:1583, 1989.
52. Cerundolo R, et al: Recurrent deep pyoderma in
Gennan shepherd dogs with underlying ehrlichiosis
and hyperglobulinemia. Vet Dennatol 9:135, 1998.
53. Chabanne L, et al: Lymphocyte subset abnormalities
in German shepherd dog pyodenna (GSP). Vet Immunol Immunopathol 49:189, 1995.
54. Chambers ED, Severin GA: Staphylococcal bacterin
for treatment of chronic staphylococcal blepharitis in
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:422, 1984.
54a. Chammas PPC, Hagiwara, MK: Evaluation of neutrophilic function (chemotaxis, phagocytosis and microbicidal activity) in healthy dogs and dogs suffering
from recurrent deep pyoderma, Vet Immunol Immunopathol 64:123, 1998.
54b. Charles J, et al: Cytology and histopathology of canine leproid granuloma syndrome. Aust Vet J 77:799,
1999.

330 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
55. Chastain CB, et aI: Dermatophilosis in two dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 169:1079, 1976.
56. Chesney CJ: The microclimate of the canine coat:
The effect of heating on coat and skin temperature
and relative humidity. Vet Dermatol 8:183, 1997.
57. Christensen GD: Coagulase-negative staphylococcisaprophyte or parasite? Int J Dermatol 22:463, 1983.
58. Chusid MJ, et al: Defective polymorphonuclear leukocyte metabolism and function in canine cyclic neutropenia. Blood 46:921, 1975.
59. Clerex C, et aI: Tuberculosis in dogs: A case report
and review of the literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
28:207, 1992.
60. Clercx C, et aI: Nonresponsive generalized bacterial
infection associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in a Beauceron. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35, 220,
1999.
61. Cohen ND, et aI: Clinical and epizootiologic characteristics of dogs seropositive for Borrelia burgdoiferi
in Texas: llO cases (1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:
893, 1990.
62. Conceicao LG, et al: Identification of bacterial flora
and antimicrobial staphylococcal sensitivity from canine pyoderma in Brazil. In: Kwotchka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 546.
63. Cox HU, et aI: Antimicrobial susceptibility of coagulase positive staphylococci isolated from Louisiana
dogs. Am J Vet Res 44:2039, 1984.
64. Cox HU, Hoskins JD: Distribution of staphylococcal
species on clinically healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
1824, 1985.
65. Cox HU, et aI: Species of Staphylococcus isolated
from animal infections. Cornell Vet 74:124, 1984.
66. Cox HU, Schmeer N: Protein A in Staphylococcus
intermedius isolates from dogs and cats. Am J Vet
Res 47:1881, 1986.
67. Couto CG, et aI: In vitro immunologic features of
weimaraner dogs with neutrophil abnormalities and
recurrent infections. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 23:
103, 1989.
68. Couto CG: Patterns of infection associated with immunodeficiency. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura, JD (eds):
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 223.
69. Crowe DT, Kowalski JJ: Clostridial cellulitis with localized gas formation in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
169:1094, 1976.
70. Curtis C, Lloyd D: Treatment of canine idiopathic
recurrent pyoderma. Vet Rec 140:587, 1997.
71. Davenport DJ, Johnson GC: Cutaneous nocardiosis in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:728, 1986.
7la. Davis RM: Use of orally administered chitin inhibitor (lufenuron) to control flea vectors of plague on
ground squirrels in California. J Med Entomol 30:
562, 1999.
72. Dawkins BG, et aI: Pyogranulomatous dermatitis associated with Brucella canis infection in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 181:1432, 1982.
73. Davidson EB: Managing bite wounds in dogs and
cats: Part I. Comp Cont Ed 20:811, 1998.
74. Davidson EB: Managing bite wounds in dogs and
cats: Part II. Comp Cont Ed 20:974, 1998.
74a. Day MJ: Expression of major histocompatibility
complex class II molecules by dermal inflammatory
cells, epidermal Langerhans' cells and keratinocytes in
canine dermatological disease. J Comp Pathol ll5:
317, 1996.

74b. Day MJ: Possible immunodeficiency in related rottweiler dogs. J Small Anim Pract 40:561, 1999.
75. Day MJ, Penhale WJ: Serum immunoglobulin A concentrations in normal and diseased dogs. Res Vet Sci
45:36, 1988.
76. Day MJ: An immunopathological study of deep pyoderma in the dog. Res Vet Sci 56:18, 1994.
77. Day MI: Inheritance of serum autoantibody, reduced
serum IgA, and autoimmune disease in a breeding
colony. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:207, 1996.
78. DeBoer DJ, et al: Evaluation of commercial staphylococcal bacterin for management of idiopathic recurrent superficial pyoderma in dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:
636, 1990.
79. DeBoer DJ, et aI: Clinical and immunological responses of dogs with recurrent pyoderma to injection
of staphylococcus phage lysate. In: von Tscharner C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol I. Batlltaere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 335.
80. DeBoer DJ, Pukay BP: Recurrent pyoderma and immunostimulants. In: Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2.
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 443.
81. DeBoer DJ: Management of chronic and recurrent
pyoderma in the dog. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1995, p 611.
81a. Degim IT, et aI: In vitro percutaneous absorption of
fusidic acid and betamethasone-17-valerate across canine skin. J Small Anim Pract 40:515, 1999.
82. deLisle GW, et al: A report of tuberculosis in cats in
New Zealand, and the examination of strains of Mycobacterium bovis by DNA restriction endonuclease
analysis. N Z Vet J 38:10, 1990.
83. DeManuelle TC, et aI: Determination of skin concentration of enrofloxacin in dogs with pyoderma. Am J
Vet Res 59:1599, 1998.
84. Denerolle P, et aI: German shepherd dog pyoderma:
A prospective study of 23 cases. Vet Dermatol 9:243,
1998.
85. Devriese LA: Identification and characterization of
staphylococci isolated from cats. Vet Microbiol 9:279,
1984.
86. Devriese LA, DePelsmaecker K: The anal region as a
main carrier site of Staphylococcus intennedius and
Streptococcus canis in dogs. Vet Rec 121:302, 1987.
87. Devriese LA, Haesebrouch F: Streptococcus suis infection in horses and cats. Vet Rec 130:300, 1992.
87a. DeWinter LM, Prescott JF: Relatedness of Streptococcus canis from streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
and necrotizing fasciitis. Can J Vet Res 63:90, 1999.
87b. DeWinter LM, et aI: Virulence of Streptococcus
canis from canine streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
and necrotizing fasciitis. Vet Microbiol 70:95, 1999.
88. Donnelly TM, et aI: Diffuse cutaneous granulomatous
lesions associated with acid-fast bacilli in a cat. J
Small Anim Praet 23:99, 1982.
89. Donohue DE, Brightman AH: Cervicofacial Actinomyces viscosus infection in a Brazilial Fila: A case
report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
31:501, 1995.
90. Dow SW, et aI: Anaerobic bacterial infections and
response to treatment in dogs and cats: 36 cases
(1983-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:930, 1986.
91. Dow SM, Jones RL: Anaerobic infections. Part I:
Pathogenesis and clinical significance. Comp Cont
Educ 9:7ll, 1987.
92. Eggers JS, et aI: Disseminated Mycobacterium avium

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 331
infection in three miniature schnauzer litter mates. J
Vet Diag Invest 9:424, 1997.
93. Eidson M, et al: Clinical, clinicopathologic, and pathologtc features of plague in cats: II9 cases (19791988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:II91, 1991.
94. Edwards VN, et al: Characterization of the canine
type C enterotoxin produced by Staphylococcus intermedius pyoderma isolates. Infect Immun 65:2346,
1997.
95. Elkins AD: Hyperbaric oxygen therapy: Potential veterinary applications. Comp Cont Ed 19:607, 1997.
96. Emerson JK: Plague. Canine Pract 12:43, 1985.
96a. Esterly NB, et al: The effect of antimicrobial agents
on leukocyte chemotaxis. J Invest Dermatol 70:51,
1978.
97. Fadok VA: Granulomatous dermatitis in dogs
and cats. Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 2:186,
1987.
98. Fairley RA, Fairley NM: Rhodococcus equi infection
in cats. Vet Dermatol 10:43, 1999.
99. Farca AM, et al: Potentiating effect of EDTA-Tris on
the activity of antibiotics against resistant bacteria associated with otitis, dermatitis, and cystitis. J Small
Anim Pract 38:243, 1998.
100. Farrow BRH, et al: Pneumocystis pneumonia in the
dog. J Comp Pathol 82:447, 1972.
101. Fehrer SL, et al: Identification of protein A from
Staphylococcus intermedius isolated from canine skin.
Am J Vet Res 49:697, 1988.
102. Feingold DS: Gangrenous and crepitant cellulitis. J
Am Acad Dermatol 6:289, 1982.
103. Feingold DS: Bacterial adherence, colonization, and
pathogenicity. Arch DermatoI122:161, 1986.
104. Felsburg PJ, et al: Canine X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:
127, 1999.
105. Felsburg PJ: Primary immunodeficiencies. In: Kirk
RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XI. W.E. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p
448.
105a. Foster SF, et al: Chronic pneumonia caused by Mycobacterium thermoresistible in a cat. J Small Anim
Pract 40:433, 1999.
106. Fox LE, et al: Disseminated subcutaneous Mycobacterium jortuitum infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 206:53, 1995.
107. Frank LA, Kunkle GA: Comparison of the efficacy of
cefadroxil and generic and proprietary cephalexin in
the treatment of pyoderma in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 203:530, 1993.
108. Giger U, et al: Deficiency of leukocyte surface glycoproteins mol, LFA-l and Leu M5 in a dog with
recurrent bacterial infections: An animal model.
Blood 69:1622, 1987.
108a. Girard C, Higgins R: Staphylococcus intermedius
cellulitis and toxic shock in a dog. Can Vet J 40:501,
1999.
109. Goodacre R, et al: An epidemiologic study of Staphylococcus intermedius strains isolated from dogs, their
owners, and veterinary surgeons. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis 44:49, 1997.
109a. Gortel K, et al: Methicillin resistance among staphylococci isolated from dogs. Am J Vet Res 60:1526,
1999.
IIO. Grooters AM, et al: Systemic Mycobacterium smegmatis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
457, 1995.
III. Gross TL, Connelly MR: Nontuberculous mycobac-

terial skin infections in two dogs. Vet Pathol 20:II7,
1983.
II2. Cuaguere E, Picard G: Utilization de la cefalexine et
du lactate d'ethyle dans Ie traitement des pyodermites
canines. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:547, 1990.
II3. Cuaguere E: Topical treatment of canine and feline
pyoderma. Vet Dermatol 7:145, 1996.
II4. Cuaguere E, et al: Utilisation de la cefalexine dans Ie
traitement des pyodermites canines: Comparaison de
l'efficaclte de differentes posoligies. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 33:237, 1998.
II5. Cuaguero E, et al: Cephalexin in the treatment of
canine pyoderma: Comparison of two dose rates. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford,
1998, p 547.
116. Cunn-Moore DA, et al: Feline tuberculosis: A literature review and discussion of 19 cases caused by an
unusual mycobacterial variant. Vet Rec 138:53, 1996.
117. Cunn-Moore DA, Shaw S: Mycobacterial disease in
the cat. In Pract 17:493, 1997.
1I7a. Hall JA, et al: Comparison of three commercial radial immunodiffusion kits for the measurement of canine serum immunoglobulins. J Vet Diagn Invest 7:
559, 1995.
118. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989,
p 253.
119. Hardie EM, Barsanti JA: Treatment of canine actinomycosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:537, 1982.
120. Hart BL, Barrett RE: Effects of castration on fighting, roaming, and urine spraying in adult male cats. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 163:290, 1973.
120a. Hartnett BJ, et al: Bone marrow transplantation for
canine X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:137, 1999.
121. Harvey RG, et al: Distribution of propionibacteria on
dogs: A preliminary report of the findings on II dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 34:80, 1993.
122. Harvey RG, et al: A comparison of lincomycin hydrochloride and clindamycin hydrochloride in the treatment of superficial pyoderma in dogs. Vet Rec 132:
351, 1993.
123. Harvey RG, Nobel WC: Aspects of nasal, oropharyngeal and anal carriage of Staphylococcus intermedius
in normal dogs and dogs with pyoderma. Vet Dermatol 9:99, 1998.
124. Harvey RG: Aspects of the interaction between the
skin and staphylococci. In: Proceedings of the North
American Veterinarians Conference, 1998, p 79.
125. Harvey RG, Lloyd DH: The distribution of bacteria
(other than staphylococci and Propionibacterium acnes) on the hair, at the skin surface and within the
hair follicles of dogs. Vet Dermatol 6:79, 1995.
126. Harvey RG, Noble WC: A temporal study comparing
the carriage on Staphylococcus intermedius on normal
dogs or atopic dogs in clinical remission. Vet Dermatol 5:21, 1994.
127. Harvey RG: Tylosin in the treatment of canine superficial pyodenna. Vet Rec 139:185, 1996.
128. Harvey RG, et al: Nasal carriage of Staphylococcus
intermedius in humans in contact with dogs. Microb
Ecol Health Dis 7:225, 1994.
129. Harvey RG, Hunter PA: The properties and use of
penicillins in the veterinary field with special reference to skin infections in the dog and cat. Vet DermatollO:177, 1999.
130. Hesselbarth J, et al: Characterization of Staphylococ-

332 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
cus intennedius from healthy dogs and cases of superficial pyoderma by DNA restrictive endonuclease patterns. Vet Microb 41:259, 1994.
131. Hesselbarth J, et al: Studies on the production of an
exfoliative toxin by Staphylococcus intennedius. J Vet
Med B 41:411, 1994.
132. Higgins R, Paradis M: Abscess caused by Corynebacterium equi in a cat. Can Vet J 21:63, 1980.
133. Hill PB, Moriello KA: Canine pyoderma. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 204:334, 1994.
133a. Hirsh DC, Jang SS: Antimicrobial susceptibility of
Nocardia nova isolated from five cats with nocardiosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:815, 1999.
134. Hinton M, et al: The antibiotic resistance of pathogenic staphylococci and streptococci isolated from
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 19:229, 1978.
134a. Hirooka EY, et al: Enterotoxigenicity of Staphylococcus intermedius of canine origin. Int J Food Microbioi 7:185, 1988.
135. Hirsch DC, et al: Changes in prevalence and susceptibility of obligate anaerobes in clinical veterinary
practice. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:1086, 1985.
136. Horwitz L, Ihrke PJ: Canine seborrheas. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1977.
137. Hoskuyama S, et al: Isolation of obligate and facultative bacteria from subcutaneous abscesses. J Vet Med
Sci 58:273, 1996.
137a. Hughes MS, et al: Disseminated Mycobacterium
genavense infection in an FlY-positive cat. J Feline
Med Surg 1:23, 1999.
138. Hughes MS, et al: Determination of the etiology of
presumptive feline leprosy by 16 sRNA gene analysis.
J Clin Microbiol 35:2464, 1997.
139. Hunter RP, et al: Pharmacokinetics, oral availability
and tissue distribution of azithromycin in cats. J Vet
Pharmacol Ther 18:38, 1995.
140. 19imi S, et al: Staphylococcus felis, a new species
from clinical specimens from cats. Int J Syst Bacteriol
39:373, 1989.
141. Ihrke PJ: Antibacterial therapy in dermatology. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 566.
141a. Ihrke PJ, DeManuelle TC: German Shepherd dog
pyoderma: An overview and antimicrobial management. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 21 (Suppl): 44,
1999.
142. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Canine mucocutaneous pyoderma. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1995, p 618.
143. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Conference in Dermatology, No.
1. Vet Dermatol 4:33, 1993.
144. Ihrke PJ, et al: The use of fluoroquinolones in veterinary dermatology. Vet Dermatol 10:193, 1999.
145. Jang SS, et al: Organisms isolated from dogs and cats
with anaerobic infections and susceptibility to selected
antimicrobial agents. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1610,
1997.
146. Jezyk PF, et al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 118:833, 1986.
147. Jezyk PF, et al: X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency in the dog. Coo Immunol Immunopathol 52:
173,1989.
148. Jordon HL, et al: Disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex infection in three Siamese cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 204:90, 1994.
149. Kaufman AC, et al: Treatment of isolated Mycobacte-

rium avium complex infection with clofazimine and
doxycycline in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:457,
1995.
150. Keane DP: Chronic abscesses in cats associated with
an organism resembling mycoplasma. Can Vet J 24289, 1983.
151. Keane KA, Taylor DJ: Slime-producing Staphylococcus species in canine pyoderma. Vet Rec 130:75,
1992.
ISla. Kennis RA, Wolf AM: Chronic bacterial skin infections in cats. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:1108,
1999.
152. Kietzmann M, et al: Vertraglichkeif and Pharmakokinetik von Cefalexin (cefaseptin dragees) beim Hund.
Kleintierpraxis 35:390, 1990.
153. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB: Cutaneous actinomycosis
and nocardiosis in dogs: 48 cases (1980-1990). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 201:917, 1992.
154. Koch HJ, Peters S: Antimicrobial therapy in German
shepherd dog pyoderma (GSP): An open clinical
study. Vet Dermatol 7:177, 1996.
155. Krakowaka S: Acquired immunodeficiency diseases.
In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1992, p 453.
156. Kramer TT: Immunity to bacterial infections. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 8:683, 1978.
157. Krick SA, Scott DW: Bacterial folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis in the German shepherd: A retrospective analysis of 17 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
25:23, 1989.
158. Kristensen S, Krogh HV: A study of skin diseases in
dogs and cats. III: Microflora of the skin of dogs with
chronic eczema. Nord Vet Med 30:223, 1978.
159. Kristensen F, Aalbaek B: Sarinfektian med Rhodococcus equi hos en kat. Dansk Vet 75:969, 1993.
160. Krogh HF, Kristensen S: A study of skin diseases in
dogs and cats. Nord Vet Med 28:459, 1976.
161. Kruse H, et al: The antimicrobial susceptibility of
Staphylococcus species isolated from canine dermatitis. Vet Res Commun 20:205, 1996.
162. Kunkle GA, et al: Rapidly growing mycobacteria as a
cause of cutaneous granulomas: Report of five cases. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:513, 1983.
163. Kunkle GA: New considerations for rational antibiotic
therapy of cutaneous staphylococcal infection in the
dog. Semin Vet Med Surg Small Anim 2:212, 1987.
164. Kwochka KW, Kowalski JJ: Prophylactic efficacy of
four antibacterial shampoos against Staphylococcus intermedius in dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:115, 1991.
165. Kwochka KW: Recurrent pyoderma. In: Griffin CE,
Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
P 3.
166. Latimer KS, et al: Disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex infection in a cat: Presumptive diagnosis
by blood smear examination. Vet Clin Pathol 26:85,
1997.
166a. Lanevschi A, et al: Granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor deficiency in a Rottweiler with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. J Vet Intern Med 13:72, 1999.
167. Lee AH, et al: Effects of chlorhexidine diacetate,
providone iodine, and polyhydroxydine on wound
healing in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:77, 1988.
168. Lewis DT, et al: Experimental reproduction of feline
Mycobacterium fortuitum panniculitis. Vet Dermatol
5:189, 1994.
169. Littlewood JD, et al: Clindamycin hydrochloride and

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 333
clavulanatedJamoxycilin in the treatment of canine superficial pyodermas. Vet Rec 144:662, 1999.
170. Liu S, et al: Canine tuberculosis. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 177:164, 1980.
171. Lloyd DH, Jenkinson DM: The effect of climate on
experimental infection of bovine skin with Dermatophilus congolensis. Br Vet J 136:122, 1980.
172. Lloyd DH: Skin surface immunity. Vet Dermatol
News 5:10, 1980.
173. Lloyd DH: The cutaneous defense mechanisms. Vet
Dermatol News 1:9, 1976.
174. Lloyd DH, et al: Sensitivity to antibiotics amongst
cutaneous and mucosal isolates of canine pathogenic
staphylococci in the U.K., 1980-96. Vet Dermatol 7:
171, 1996.
175. Lloyd H, Reyss-Brion A: Le peroxide de benzoyle:
Efficacite clinique et bacteriologique dans Ie traitement des pyodermites chroniques. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 19:445, 1984.
176. Lloyd DH, et al: Carriage of Staphylococcus intermedius on the ventral abdomen of clinically normal dogs
and those with pyoderma. Vet Dermatol 2:161,
1991.
177. Lloyd DH, et al: Treatment of canine pyoderma with
co-amoxyclav: A comparison of two dose rates. Vet
Rec 141:439, 1997.
178. Lloyd DR, et al: Fluoroquinolone resistance in
Staphylococcus intermedius. Vet Dermatol 10:248,
1999.
179. Loncarevic S, et al: A case of canine cutaneous listeriosis. Vet DermatoI1O:69, 1999.
180. Lotti T, Hartmann G: Atypical mycobacterial infections: A difficult and emerging group of infectious
dermatoses. Int J Dermatol 32:499, 1993.
181. Love DN, et al: Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns
of obligately anaerobic bacteria from subcutaneous
abscesses and pyothorax in cats. Aust Vet Pract 10:
168, 1980.
182. Love D N, et al: Characterization of strains of staphylococci from infections in dogs and cats. J Small Anim
Pract 22:195, 1981.
183. McEwan NA: Bacterial adherence to canine corneocytes. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliaere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 454.
184. McIntosh DW: Feline leprosy: A review of forty-four
cases from western Canada. Can Vet J 23:291, 1982.
185. Malik R, et al: Mycobacterial nodular granulomas affecting the subcutis and skin of dogs (canine leproid
granuloma syndrome). Aust Vet J 76:403, 1998.
186. Malik R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of pyogranulomatous panniculitis due to Mycobacterium smegmatis in cats. J Small Anim Pract 35:524, 1994.
187. Malik R, et al: Localised Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis infection in a cat. Aust Vet Practit 26:27,
1996.
188. Manders SM: Toxin-mediated streptotoccal and
staphylococcal disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:393,
1998.
189. Manning TO: Canine pododermatitis. Dermatol Rep
2:1, 1983.
190. Marino DJ, Jaggy A: Nocardiosis: A literature review
with selected case reports in two dogs. J Vet Int Med
7:4, 1993.
191. Mason KY, Wilkinson GT: Results of treatment of
atypical mycobacteriosis. In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 452.

191a. Mason IS: Pathogenesis of canine pyoderma. Proc
Br Vet Dermatol Study Group, Autumn 1999, p 37.
192. Mason IS, et al: A review of the biology of canine
skin with respect to the commensals Staphylococcus
intermedius, Demodex canis, and Malassezia pachydermatitis. Vet Dermatol 7:119, 1996.
193. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: The role of allergy in the
development of canine pyoderma. J Small Anim Pract
30:216, 1989.
194. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Scanning electron microscopic
studies of the living epidermis and stratum corneum
in dogs. In: Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 131.
195. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: The macroscopic and microscopic effects of intradermal injections of crude and
purified staphylococcal extracts on canine skin. Vet
Dermatol 6:197, 1995.
196. Mason IS, Kietzmann M: Cephalosporins-pharmacological basis of clinical use in veterinary dermatology. Vet Dermatol 10:187, 1999.
196a. Mealey K, et al: Hypercalcemia associated with
granulomatous disease in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
215:959, 1999.
197. Medleau L, et al: Frequency and antimicrobial susceptibility of Staphylococcus spp. isolated from canine
pyodermas. Am J Vet Res 47:229, 1986.
198. Medleau L, Blue JL: Frequency and antimicrobial
susceptibility of Staphylococcus spp. isolated from feline skin lesions. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1080,
1988.
199. Medleau LM, et al: Superficial pyoderma in the cat:
Diagnosing an uncommon skin disorder. Vet Med 86:
807, 1991.
200. Messinger LM, Beale KM: A blinded comparison of
the efficacy of daily and twice daily trimethoprimsulfadiazine and daily sulfamethoxine-ormetoprim
therapy in the treatment of canine pyoderma. Vet
Dermatol 4:13, 1993.
201. Michaud AJ: The use of clofazimine as treatment for
Mycobacterium fortuitum in a cat. Feline Pract 22:7,
1994.
202. Miller CW, et al: Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1427, 1996.
202a, Miller MA, et al: Inflammatory pseudotumor in a cat
with cutaneous mycobacteriosis. Vet Pathol 36:161,
1999.
203. Miller RI, Ladds PW: Probable dermatophilosis in
two cats. Aust Vet J 60:155, 1983.
204. Miller WH Jr: Deep pyoderma in two German shepherd dogs associated with a cell-mediated immunodeficiency. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:513, 1991.
205. Monroe WE, Chickering WR: Atypical mycobacterial
infections in cats. Comp Cont Educ 10:1043, 1988.
206. Morales CA, et al: Antistaphylococcal antibodies in
dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 42:137, 1994.
207. Muller RS, et al: Antibiotic sensitivity of Staphylococcus intermedius isolated from canine pyoderma. Aust
Vet Practit 28:10, 1998.
208. Mundell AC: The use of clofazirnine in the treatment of three cases of feline leprosy. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990,
p 451.
209. Noble WC, Kent LE: Antibiotic resistance in Staphylococcus intermedius isolated from cases with pyoderma in the dog. Vet Dermatol 3:71, 1992.

334 • Bacterial Skin Diseases
210. Noli C, Boothe D: Macrolides and lincosamides. Vet
Dennatol 10:217, 1999.
211. Norris JM, Love DN: The isolation and enumeration
of three feline oral Porphqromonas species from subcutaneous abscesses in cats. Vet Microbiol 65:115,
1999.
212. Oluoch AD, et al: Trends of bacterial infections in
dogs: Characterization of Staphylococcus intermedius
isolates (1990-1992). Canine Pract 21:12, 1996.
213. Orloski KA, Eidson M: Yersina pestis infection in
three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:316, 1995.
213a. Pak SI, et al: Characterization of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus isolated from dogs in Korea. J
Vet Med Sci 61:1013, 1999.
214. Paradis M, et al: Efficacy of enrofloxacin in the treatment of canine bacterial pyodenna. Vet Dennatol 1:
123, 1990.
215. Patel A, et al: Antimicrobial resistance of feline staphylococci in south-eastern England. Vet Dermatol 10:
257, 1999.
216. Paul JW, Gordon MA: Efficacy of a chlorhexidine
surgical scrub compared to that of hexachlorophene
and providone-iodine. Vet Med 73:573, 1978.
217. Pechereau D, et al: Abces sous-cutanes et plates infectees chez Ie chat: Bactenologie et efficacite elinlque de la clindamycine. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
30:99, 1995.
218. Pellerin JL, et al: Epidemiosurveillance of antimicrobial compound resistance of Staphylococcus intermedius clinical isolates from canine pyodennas. Comp
Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis 21:115, 1998.
219. Petersen A, et al: Frequency and antimicrobial susceptibility of Staphylococcus intermedius and Pseudonwnas aeruginosa isolated from dogs over a six year
period (1992-1997). Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dennatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 14-35,
1998.
220. Phillips WE, Kloos WE: Identification of coagulasepositive Staphylococcus intermedius and Staphylococcus hyicus subspp. hyicus isolated from veterinary
clinical specimens. J Clin Microbiol 14:671, 1981.
221. Phillips WE, Williams BJ: Antimicrobial susceptibility
patterns of canine Staphylococcus intennedius isolates
from veterinary clinical specimens. Am J Vet Res 45:
2377, 1984.
222. Pickler ME: Gaseous gangrene in a dog: Successful
treatment using hyperbaric oxygen and conventional
treatment. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:807, 1982.
223. Piriz S, et al: In vitro activity of fifteen antimicrobial
agents against methicillin-resistant and methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus intermedius. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 19:118, 1996.
224. Piriz S, et al: Comparative in vitro activity of 11 betalactam antibiotics against 91 Staphylococcus intermedius strains isolated from staphylococcal dermatitis in
dogs. J Vet Med B 42:293, 1995.
224a. Pirro F, et al: Bactericidal and inhibitory activity of
enrofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones in small animal pathogens. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
21(Suppl):19, 1999.
225. Plechner AJ: IgM deficiency in two Doberman pinchers. Mod Vet Pract 60:150, 1979.
225a. Plewig G, Schopf E: Anti-inflammatory effects of
antimicrobial agents: an in vivo study. J Invest Dermatol 65:532, 1975.
226. Price PM: Pyoderma caused by Peptostreptococcus tetradius in a pup. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:1649,
1991.

227. Pullen RP, et al: X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency in a family of Cardigan Welsh corgis. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 33:494, 1997.
228. Raychaudhuri SP, Raychaudhuri SK: Relationship between kinetics of lesional cytokines and secondary infection in inflammatory skin disorders: A hypothesis.
Int J Dermatol 32:409, 1993.
229. Reinke SI, et al: Histopathologic features of pyotraumatic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:57,
1987.
230. Renshaw HW, et al: Canine granulocytopathy syndrome. Am J Pathol 95:731, 1979.
231. Richard JL, et al: Experimentally induced canine dermatophilosis. Am J Vet Res 34:797, 1973.
232. Roccabianca P, et al: Feline leprosy: Spontaneous remission in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:189,
1996.
233. Rosenkrantz WS: Pseudomonas aeruginosa necrotizing
dermatitis, vasculitis, and panniculitis in the cat. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
Vet Dennatol 14:77, 1998.
234. Rosser EJ: German shepherd dog pyoderma: A prospective study of 12 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:
355, 1997.
235. Rosser WW: Bubonic plague. J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:406, 1987.
236. Roth JA, et al: Improvement in clinical condition and
thymus morphologic features associated with growth
hormone treatment of immunodeficient dwarf dogs.
Am J Vet Res 45:1151, 1984.
237. Roth RR, James WD: Microbiology of the skin. J Am
Acad Dermatol 20:369, 1989.
238. Ryan CP: Selected arthropod-borne diseases: Plague,
Iyme disease, babesiosis. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 17:179, 1987.
239. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE, et al: Elimination of Staphylococcus intermedius in healthy dogs by topical treatment with fusidic acid. J Small Anim Pract 39:341,
1998.
240. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE, Lloyd DH: Adherence of
Staphylococcus intermedius to canine corenocytes in
vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Oxford, 1998, p 540.
241. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE, Lloyd DH: Carriage of
bacterial antagonists towards Staphylococcus intermedius on canine skin and mucosal surfaces. Vet Dermatol 6:187, 1995.
242. Saijonmaa-Koulumies LE, Lloyd DH: Colonization of
the canine skin with bacteria. Vet Dennatol 7:153,
1996.
243. Schiefer HB, Middleton DB: Experimental transmission of a feline mycobacterial skin disease (feline leprosy). Vet Pathol 20:460, 1983.
244. Schoeb TR, Morton R: Scrotal and testicular changes
in canine brucellosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 172:598,
1978.
245. Schultz RD: Basic veterinary immunology and a review. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 8:569,
1978.
246. Schwarz S, Noble WC: Aspects of bacterial resistance
to antimicrobials used in veterinary dermatologic
practice. Vet Dermatol 10:163, 1999.
246a. Schwassman M: Uses of interferon. Denn Dialogue,
Winter 1999, p 9.
247. Scott DW: Canine pododermatitis. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1980.

Bacterial Skin Diseases • 335
248. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1980: A monograph. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
249. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
250. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: The secret sits. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
251. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1986 to 1988: Looking
to the 1990s through the eyes of many counselors. I
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:515, 1990.
252. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
within non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies
from dogs with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell
Vet 82:379, 1992.
253. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
within non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies
from cats with non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet
82:371, 1992.
254. Scott DW, et al: The combination of ormetoprim and
sulfadimethoxine in the treatment of pyoderma due to
Staphylococcus intermedius infection in dogs. Canine
Pract 10:29, 1993.
255. Scott DW, et al: Efficacy of tylosin tablets for the
treatment of pyoderma due to Staphylococcus intermedius infection in dogs. Can Vet I 35:617, 1994.
256. Scott DW, et al: Further studies on the efficacy of
tylosin tablets for the treatment of pyoderma due to
Staphylococcus intermedius infection in dogs. Can Vet
I 37:617, 1996.
257. Scott DW, et al: Efficacy of clindamycin hydrochloride capsules for the treatment of deep pyoderma due
to Staphylococcus intemwdius in dogs. Can Vet I 39:
753, 1998.
258. Shepard RM, Falkner FC: Pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in rats and dogs. I Antimicrob Chemother
25:49, 1990.
259. Shimizu A, et al: Genomic DNA fingerprinting, using
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, of Staphylococcus intermetlius, isolated from dogs. Am I Vet Res 57:1458,
1996.
260. Snider WR: Tuberculosis in canine and feline populations: Review of the literature. Am Rev Respir Dis
104:877, 1971.
261. Spring M, et al: Antibacterial activity of marbofloxacin: A new Huoroquinolone for veterinary use against
canine and feline isolates. I Vet Pharmacol Ther 18:
284, 1995.
262. Stevenson K, et al: Feline skin granuloma associated
with Mycobacterium avium. Vet Rec 143:109, 1998.
263. Stewart LJ, et al: Cutaneous Mycobacterium avium
infection in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4:87, 1993.
264. Studdert VP, Hughes KL: Treatment of opportunistic
mycobacterial infections with enroHoxacin in cats. I
Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1300, 1992.
265. Swaim SF, et al: Fusion podoplasty for the treatment
of chronic fibrosing interdigital pyoderma in the dog.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:264, 1991.
265a. Toman M, et al: Secondary immunodeficiency in
dogs with enteric, dermatologic, infectious or parasitic
diseases. I Vet Med B 45:321, 1998.
266. Tomlin I, et al: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus infection in 11 dogs. Vet Rec 144:60, 1999.
267. Tredten HW, et al: Mycobacterium bacteremia in a
dog: Diagnosis of septicemia by microscopic evaluation of blood. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:359, 1990.

268. Trepanier L: Delayed hypersensitivity reactions to
sulphonamides: Syndromes, pathogenesis, and management. Vet Dermatol 10:241, 1999.
269. Trowald-Wigh A, et al: Leukocyte adhesion protein
deficiency in Irish setter dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:261, 1992.
270. van Dongen AM, et al: Atypical mycobacteriosis in a
cat. Vet Q 18:347, 1996.
271. Vilmanyi E, et al: Clarithromycin pharmacokinetics
after oral administration with or without fasting in
crossbred beagles. I Small Anim Pract 37:535, 1996.
272. Walker RD, et al: Serum and tissue cage Huid concentration of ciproHoxacin after oral administration of
the drug to healthy dogs. Am I Vet Res 51:896, 1996.
273. Walker RD, et al: Recovery of two mycoplasma species from abscesses in a cat following bite wounds
from a dog. I Vet Diag Invest 7:154, 1995.
274. Walton DK, et al: Cutaneous bacterial granuloma
(botryomycosis) in a dog and cat. I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 19:537, 1983.
274a. Webster GF: New antibiotics: A dermatologist's
guide. Adv Dermatol11:105, 1996.
275. Welsh 0, et al: Amikacin alone and in combination
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in the treatment
of actinomycotic mycetoma. I Am Acad Dermatol 17:
443, 1987.
276. Werner AH, Russell AD: Mupirocin, fusidic acid, and
bacitracin: Activity, action, and clinical uses of three
topical antibiotics. Vet Dermatol 10:225, 1999.
277. White SD, et al: Cutaneous atypical mycobacteriosis
in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 182:1218, 1983.
278. White SD, et al: Occurrence of S. aureus on the
clinically normal canine hair coat. Am I Vet Res 44:
332, 1983.
279. White SD: Pododermatitis. Vet Dermatoll:l, 1989.
280. White SD: Pyoderma in 5 cats. I Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:141, 1991.
281. White SD: Systemic treatment of bacterial skin infections of dogs and cats. Vet Dermatol 7:133, 1996.
282. White SD, et al: Feline acne and results of treatment
with mupirocin in an open clinical trial: 25 cases. Vet
Dermatol 8:157, 1997.
283. Whitney IC: Some aspects of interdigital cysts in the
dog. I Small Anim Pract 11:83, 1970.
284. Willemse T, et al: Mycobacterium thermoresistible:
Extrapulmonary infection in a cat. I Clin Microbiol
21:854, 1985.
285. Wisselink MA, et al: Immunologic aspects of German
shepherd pyoderma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol19:
67, 1988.
286. Wisselink MA, et al: German shepherd pyoderma: A
genetic disorder. Vet Q 11:161, 1989.
287. Wisselink MA, et al: Deep pyoderma in the German
shepherd dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:773, 1985.
288. Woldehiwet Z, [ones JJ: Species distribution of coagulase-positive staphylococci isolated from dogs. Vet Rec
126:485, 1990.
289. Von Tscharner C: Personal communication, Bad
Kreuznach, Germany, 1988.
290. Yager IA: The skin as an immune organ. In: Ihrke PI,
Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993,
p 3.
291. Yovich IC, Read RA: Nasal actinomyces infection in a
cat. Aust Vet Practit 25:114, 1995.

Chapter

5
Fungal Skin Diseases

• CUTANEOUS MYCOLOGY
Fungi are omnipresent in our environment. Of the thousands of different species of fungi,
only a few have the ability to cause disease in animals. The great majority of fungi are
either soil organisms or plant pathogens; however, more than 300 species have been
reported to be animal pathogens.
A mycosis (pl. mycoses) is a disease caused by a fungus. A dermatophytosis is an
infection of the keratinized tissues, claw, hair, and stratum corneum that is caused by a
species of Microsporum, Trichophyton, or Epidemwphyton. These organisms-dermatophytes-are unique fungi that are able to invade and maintain themselves in keratinized
tissues. A dermatomycosis is a fungal infection of hair, claw, or skin that is caused by a
nondermatophyte, a fungus not classified in the genera Microsporum, Trichophyton, or
Epidemwphyton.
Dermatophytosis and dermatomycosis are different clinical entities. Fungi, however,
are not nearly as common a cause of skin disease as supposed; many dermatoses are
misdiagnosed as "fungus infections" on the basis of clinical presentation. On the other
hand, many true fungal infections are probably not diagnosed because of the variability of
clinical presentations.

General Characteristics of Fungi
The term fungus includes yeasts and molds. The kingdom of Fungi is recognized as one
of the five kingdoms of organisms. The other four kingdoms are Monera (bacteria and
blue-green algae), Protista (protozoa), Plantae (plants), and Animalia (animals). 1-3, 9, 10
Fungi are eukaryotic achlorophyllous organisms that may grow in the form of a yeast
(unicellular), a mold (multicellular-filamentous), or both. The cell walls of fungi consist of
chitin, chitosan, glucan, and mannan and are used to distinguish the fungi from the
Protista. Unlike plants, fungi do not have chlorophyll. The kingdom of Fungi contains five
divisions: Chytridomycota, Zygomycota, Basidiomycota, Ascomycota, and Fungi Imperfecti
or Deuteromvcota.
Fungi h;ve traditionally been identified and classified (1) by their method of producing conidia and spores, (2) by the size, shape, and color of the conidia, and (3) by the
type of hyphae and their macroscopic appearance (e.g., by the color and texture of the
colony and sometimes by physiologic characteristics). Therefore, it is important to understand the terms that describe these characteristics.
A single vegetative filament of a fungus is a hypha. A number of vegetative filaments
are called hyphae, and a mass of hyphae is known as a mycelium. Hyphae are septate if
they have divisions between cells or sparsely septate if they have many nuclei within a
cell. This latter condition is known as cenocytic. The term conidium (pl. conidia) should
be used only for an asexual propagule or unit that gives rise to genetically identical
organisms. A conidiophore is a simple or branched mycelium bearing conidia or conidiogenous cells. A conidiogenous cell is any fungal cell that gives rise to a conidium.
(Modem taxonomists also may use sexual reproduction characteristics and biochemical and
immunologic methods for identification.) There are six major types of conidia: blastoco336

Fungal Skin Diseases • 337

nidia, arthroconidia, annelloconidia, phialoconidia, poroconidia, and aleuriconidia. More
detailed information about fungal taxonomy can be found in other texts. 1-3, 9. to
Changes in the scientific names resulting from recent taxonomic studies have caused
some confusion regarding the names of pathogenic fungi. Some disease names have been
based on geographic distribution or have been created by the indiscriminate lumping
together of dissimilar diseases. We attempt to name diseases on the basis of a single
etiologic agent and common usage, tempered by contemporary knowledge of geographic
distribution and current taxonomy. Mycotic diseases are divided into three categories:
superficial, subcutaneous, and systemic. The first category contains the most common
fungal diseases in veterinary dermatology.

Characterization of Pathogenic Fungi
Fungi that are pathogenic to plants are distributed throughout all divisions of fungi, but
those that are pathogenic to animals are found primarily in the Fungi Imperfecti and the
Ascomycota.v-'- 9, to
A yeast is a unicellular budding fungus that forms blastoconidia, whereas a mold is a
filamentous fungus. Some pathogenic fungi, such as Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides
immitis, Sporothrix schenckii, and Blastomyces dermatitidis, are dimorphic. Dimorphic
fungi are capable of existing in two different morphologic forms. For example, at 37°C
(98.6°F) in enriched media or in vivo, B. dermatitidis exists as a yeast, but at 30°C (86°F)
it grows as a mold. C. immitis is unique in that at 37°C (98.6°F) or in tissue, spherules
containing endospores are formed. Some fungi such as Aspergillus form true hyphae in
tissue and are a mold at either 30°C or 37°C (86°F or 98.6°F). Another manifestation of
fungal growth in tissue is the presence of granules (grains) that are organized masses of
hyphae in a crystalline or amorphous matrix. These granules are characteristic of the
mycotic infection mycetoma and are the result of interaction between the host tissue and
the fungus.
At one time, numerous fungi were thought to be pathogens. Today, with the increased use of broad-spectrum antibiotics and immunosuppressive therapy, the presence
of chronic immunosuppressive diseases (e.g., feline leukemia virus [FeLV] and feline
immunodeficiency virus [FIV] infections), and improved mycologic techniques, many fungi
that were considered contaminants have, in fact, been found to be pathogenic. The
following criteria can be helpful in differentiating pathogenic from contaminant fungi: (1)
source, (2) number of colonies isolated, (3) species, (4) whether the fungus can be
repeatedly isolated, and most important (5) the presence of fungal elements in the tissue.
A fungus isolated from a normal sterile site, such as a biopsy specimen, warrants
greater credence as a pathogen than that same fungus isolated from the surface of the
skin, where it may be an airborne contaminant. The number of colonies isolated should
influence the decision as to whether an organism is a contaminant or a pathogen. One
isolated colony of Aspergillus may have resulted from an airborne conidium that floated
into a plate, whereas a Petri dish filled with Aspergillus fumigatus could represent a
pathogen. Colonies that are not visible on the streak line of the agar should be considered
contaminants. Certain species of fungi are definitely recognized as pathogens, however, so
if even only one colony is isolated, it should be reported. Such organisms include B.
dermatuidis, H. capsulatum, C. immitis, and Cryptococcus neoformans. Another indication
of fungal pathogenicity is that the same fungus can be repeatedly isolated from the lesion.
In order to confirm that a fungus is a cause of a mycosis, the fungal structures observed
in tissue or a direct smear must correlate with the fungus identified in culture.
Although gross colonies of dermatophytes are never black, brown, or green, organisms
in fungal cultures are properly identified by medical laboratory clinicians who have expertise in such matters. Detailed information on the cultural growth of three common
dennatophytes (Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
and commonly isolated fungal contaminants is available in other texts. I, 2, 9. 10

338 • Fungal Skin Diseases
• Table 5-1

SAPROPHYTIC FUNGI ISOLATED FROM THE
HAIRCOAT AND SKIN OF NORMAL
DOGS AND CATS

Absidia
Acremonium
Alternaria
Anixiopsis
Arthrinium
Arthrodenna
Aspergillus
Aureobasidium
Beauveria
Botrytis
Candida

Cephalosporium
Chaetomiu m
Chrysosporium
Cladosporium
Diheterospora
Doratomyces
Drechslera
Epicoccum
Fusarium
Geomyces

Geotrichum
Gliocladium
Gymnascella
Malassezia
Malbranchea
Mucor

Paecilomuces
Penicillium
Pestalotia
Phoma

Bhizopus
Bhodotorula
Scopulariopsis
Stemphylium
Trichocladium
Trichoderma
Trichosporon
Trichothecium
Ulocladium
Verticillium

NORMAL FUNGAL MICROFLORA
Dogs and cats harbor many saprophytic molds and yeasts on their haircoats and skin
(Table 5-1). The most common of these fungi isolated from dogs are species of Alternaria, Aspergillus, Aureobasidium, Chrusosporium, Cladosporium, Mucor, Penicillium, and
Rhizopus. lOa, 13, 26, 65, 68, 87-89 In cats, the most commonly isolated fungi are species of
Alternaria, Aspergillus, Chrusosporium, Cladosporium, Mucor, Penicillium, Rhodotorula,
and Scopulariopsis.P: 13a, 65, 67, 88 Most of these saprophytic isolates probably represent
repeated transient contamination by airborne fungi or by fungi in soil. Cats infected with
FeLV and/or FIV have a greater diversity of fungi isolated from their skin and mucosal
surfaces.!"
Dermatophytes are also isolated from the haircoats and skin of normal dogs and cats."
It is likely that dermatophytes isolated from normal dogs and cats-such as M. gypseum,
T. mentagrophytes, Trichophyton rubrum; Trichophyton terrestre-simply represent recent contamination from the environment. For instance, it is not unheard of to isolate a
geophilic dermatophyte, such as M. gypseum, from normal dogs or from a dog presented
for a skin disease (e.g., pododermatitis) wherein these dermatophytes are playing no
pathogenic role. This is particularly true in outdoor animals. Dermatophytes, especially M.
gypseum, were isolated from the majority of soil samples in urban and rural areas of
Creece.s' In one study, anthropophilic dermatophytes were isolated from about 10% of
the stray cats in various animal shelters, indicating that cats can mechanically carry human
pathogens." M. canis, however, is undeniably present as a persistent infection in many
asymptomatic or inapparently infected cats. t

Culture and Examination of Fungi
Proper specimen collection, isolation, culture, and identification are necessary to determine the cause of a fungal infection. Detailed information on these important techniques
is presented in Chapter 2.

• SUPERFICIAL MYCOSES
The superficial mycoses are fungal infections that involve superficial layers of the skin,
hair, and claws. The organisms may be dermatophytes such as Microsporum and Trichophyton, which are able to use keratin. However, other fungi such as Candida (Monilia),

"See references 13, 15, 24, 26, 49, 65, 68, 88-90,
t See references 13, 15, 26, 43, 65, 68, 88, 90.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 339

Malassezia (Pityrosporum), and Trichosporon (piedra) may also produce superficial
mycoses.

Dermatophytosis

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The dermatophytes that most frequently infect animals are Microsporum and Trichophyton. These genera can be divided into three groups on the basis of natural habitat:
geophilic, zoophilic, and anthropophilic. Geophilic dermatophytes, such as M. gypseum,
normally inhabit soil, in which they decompose keratinous debris. Zoophilic dermatophytes, such as M. canis, Microsporum distortum, and Trichophyton equinum, have become adapted to animals and are only rarely found in soil. Anthropophilic dermatophytes,
such as Microsporum audouinii, have become adapted to humans and do not survive in
soil.
Three fungi cause the great majority of clinical cases of dermatophytosis in dogs and
cats'" 17,43,49,87,89: M. canis, M. gypseum, and T. mentagrophytes. In general, M. canis is
the most common cause of dermatophytosis in cats and dogsP· 17. 43. 49, 89 There is,
however, great variation in the proportion in which these three fungi occur in different
parts of the world." The incidence and prevalence of dermatophytosis vary with the
climate and natural reservoirs. In a hot, humid climate, the incidence is higher than in a
cold, dry climate. In one study, there was a strong positive correlation between the
frequency of isolation of M. canis and higher relative humidity." M. canis was isolated
from 4% of the cats in various animal shelters in the southeastern United States (Florida)
but in none of the shelter cats sampled in the northern United States (Wisconsinj/"
The frequency of isolating M. canis from shelter cats is significantly correlated with
housing practices." In Greece, M. canis was the only dermatophyte isolated from the hair
coat of normal dogs living in urban areas, whereas M. gypseum, T. mentagrophytes, and T.
terrestre were the most commonly isolated from the hair coat of normal dogs living in
rural areas.>' It has been reported that the seasonal incidence of dermatophytosis in dogs
and cats in the United States varies with the species of fungus,46. 49 but no seasonality was
evident in Spain'? or the United Kingdom." The incidence may also depend on the
climate and on the amount of time the animal spends outdoors and thus is more exposed
to geophilic species. In New Zealand, the frequency of isolation of M. canis was significantly greater in the winter months."
In general, the incidence for dogs in the northern hemisphere can be summarized as
follows: (1) M. canis is high in the period from October to February and low from March
to September, (2) M. gypseum is high in the period from July to November and low from
December to June, (3) T. mentagrophytes is present all year, with a peak occurring in
November and December. In general, the incidence for cats can be summarized as
follows: (1) M. canis varies little all year, (2) M. gypseum and T. mentagrophytes are
seldom reported in cats, but a slight increase may occur during the summer and fall
months. Other fungi reported to cause dermatophytosis in cats and dogs are listed in
Table 5-2. Rarely, dermatophytosis in dogs and cats is caused by simultaneous infection
with two different fungi.20. 21, 25
Dermatophytes are transmitted by contact with infected hair and scales or fungal
elements on animals, in the environment, or on fomites. 13, 43, 66 Combs, brushes, clippers,
bedding, transport cages, and other paraphernalia associated with the grooming, movement, and housing of animals are all potential sources of infection and re-infection. M,
canis can be cultured from dust, heating vents, and furnace filters." Visitors to catteries
and multiple-cat households may introduce organisms. 66 The source of M. canis infections
is usually an infected cat. Trichophyton spp. infections are usually acquired directly or
indirectly by exposure to typical reservoir hosts, which may be determined by specific

"See references 13, 24, 26, 27, 29, 49, 87-89.

340 • Fungal Skin Diseases
• Table 5-2

DERMATOPHYTES ISOLATED FROM
DOGS AND CATS

DERMATOPHYTE

Epidermophyton floccosum
Microsporum audouinii (M. langeronii, M. rioalierii)
M. canis (M. equinum, M. feltneum, M. lanosum, M. obesum)
M. cookei
M. distortum
M. equinum
M. ferrugineum
M·fulvum
M. gypseum (M. fulvum, M. duboisii, Achorion gypseum)
M. nanum
M. persicolor
M. vanbreuseghemii
Trichophyton ajelloi (Keratinomyces ajelloi)
T. equinum
T. erinacei (T. mentagrophytes var. erinacei)
T. gallinae (M. gallinae, A. gallinae)
T. megninii
T. mentagrophytes (T. asteroides, T. caninum, T. felineum, T. granulosum,
T. gypseum, T. qutnckeanum)
T. rubrum (T. multicolor, T. purpureum)
T. schoenleinii (A. schoenleinii)
T. simii
T. terrestre
T. tonsurans (T. accuminatum, T. cerebriforme, T. crateriforme, T. epilans,
T. fumatum, T. plicate, T. sabouraudi, T. sulfureum)
T. verrucosum (T. album, T. discoides, T. faviforme, T. ochraceum)
T. violaceum (T. glabrum, T. kagewaense, T. vinosum)

HOST*

SOURCEt

B
B
B
B
B
D
D
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B

A
A

B
B
D
B
B
B
B

Z
G
Z
Z
A
Z
G
Z
Z
G
G

Z
Z
Z

A
Z
A
A

Z, G
G
A

Z

A

'B = dog and cat; D = dog.
t A = anthropophilic; G = geophilic; Z = zoophilic.

identification of the fungal species or subspecies. For example, most T. mentagrophytes
infections are associated with exposure to rodents or their immediate environment. M.
gypseum is a geophilic dermatophyte that inhabits rich soil. Cats and dogs are usually
exposed to it by digging and rooting in contaminated areas. In Greece, M. gypseum was
isolated from 7.2% of the dogs with dermatophytosis, 4% of the clinically normal dogs
(especially the paws), and 32.6% of the soil samples." However, rooting did not seem to
play a significant role in contamination of the bridge of the nose of dogs in Creeoe.t?Microsporum persicolor is a natural resident and occasional pathogen of mice and voles,
and contact with these rodents (hunting, rural animals) is the source of infection.
Infections with anthropophilic species are rare; they are acquired as reverse zoonoses
by contact with infected humans. Hair shafts containing infectious arthrospores may
remain infectious in the environment for many months-for example, up to 18 months in
the case of M. canisP, 43, 66, 90 The floors of 50 private veterinary clinics were cultured,
and M. canis, T. terrestre, M. gypseum, and T. mentagrophytes were grown from 30%,
22%, 10%, and 4% of them, respectively. 53 Thus, the veterinarian's clinic could be the
source of infection!
Numerous studies on the asymptomatic carriage of M. canis by cats have often
yielded conflicting results, with positive cultures in 0% to 36% of cats attending veterinary
clinics, 0% to 27% of healthy pet cats, 6% to 35% of pet cats at cat shows, and 0% to
88% of stray cats." Such differences presumably relate to differences in environment and
management. The isolation of M. canis from an asymptomatic cat may represent passive

'See references 13, 26, 27, 37, 40, 63, 68, 88, 90.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 341
carriage of arthrospores and hyphae on the haircoat, acquired either directly from an
infected cat or indirectly from a contaminated environment.
When an animal is exposed to a dermatophyte, an infection may be established.
Mechanical disruption of the stratum corneum appears to be important in facilitating the
penetration and invasion of anagen hair follicles. 13. 66. 74 Hair is invaded in both ectothrix
and endothrix infections. The ectothrix fungi produce masses of arthrospores on the
surface of hair shafts, whereas endothrix fungi do not. Fungal hyphae invade the ostium of
hair follicles, proliferate on the surface of hairs, and migrate downward (proximally) to the
hair bulb, during which time the fungus produces its own keratinolytic enzymes (keratinases) that allow penetration of the hair cuticle and growth within the hair shaft until the
keratogenous zone (Adamson's fringe) is reached. At this point, the fungus either establishes an equilibrium between its downward growth and the production of keratin or it is
expelled.
Spontaneous resolution occurs when infected hairs enter the telogen phase or if an
inflammatory reaction is incited. When a hair enters telogen, keratin production slows and
stops; because the dermatophyte requires actively growing hairs for survival, fungal growth
also slows and stops. Infectious arthrospores may remain on the hair shaft, but reinfection of that particular hair follicle does not occur until it re-enters anagen.
In experimental models of M. canis infection in cats,33. 93 the incubation period
between inoculation and development of clinical lesions was 7 to 14 days. Lesions enlarged until 6 to 8 weeks post inoculation, then decreased in size and healed by 12 to 14
weeks post inoculation. Toothbrush cultures commonly remained positive until 1 to 2
weeks after clinical resolution. Hence, infection spontaneously resolved in 2lf2 to 3
months. Interestingly, cats who were able to groom themselves typically had lesions only
on the head and pinna, whereas collared cats experienced more widespread lesions,
indicating that grooming behavior can limit the development of lesions." Clipping of the
haircoat of infected cats sometimes leads to a worsening of clinical signs within 7 to 10
days after clipping. 71 This emphasizes the importance of skin trauma in the spread of
infection.
Cutaneous inflammation is due to toxins produced in the stratum corneum that
provoke a sort of biological contact dermatitis." 13,43 Host factors are poorly documented,
but the host's ability to mount an inflammatory response plays a critical role in determining the type of clinical lesions produced and in terminating the infection. Dermatophyte
infections in healthy dogs and cats are often self-limiting. Conversely, the relatively poor
inflammatory response of most typical feline dermatophyte lesions produced by M. canis
attests to the eat's relative tolerance of this fungus and probably accounts for the high rate
of asymptomatic or subclinical carriage of this species among cats. 13, 43, 66
It has been shown that T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes produce substances (especially mannans) that diminish cell-mediated immune responses and indirectly inhibit stratum corneum tumover.P These effects could predispose the animal to persistent or
recurrent infections. M. canis has been shown to possess multiple enzymatic properties,
which can vary according to the strain of fungus.42, 7,5 The keratinase from M. canis is an
a-chymotrypsin-type serine proteinase.v Strains of M. canis with a-chymotrypsin activity
may be associated with more inflammation and prurttus.v Trichophyton spp. can produce
proteolytic enzymes that induce keratinocyte acantholysis in vitro and in vivo.?"
As with many infectious diseases, young animals are predisposed to acquiring symptomatic dermatophyte infections.f" 48, 49, 56. 89 This is partly due to a delay in development of
adequate host immunity. However, differences in biochemical properties of the skin and
skin secretions (especially sebum), the growth and replacement of hair, and the physiologic status of the host as related to age may also playa role. Local factors, such as the
mechanical barrier of intact skin and the fungistatic activity of sebum caused by its fatty
acid content, are deterrents to fungal invasion.
Natural and experimental infections have been shown to incite various forms of
hypersensitivity in their hosts. 13. 43, 45. 79, 91, 93 M. canis contains numerous antigens, and M.
canis-infected cats have antibodies against several of these." When M. canis glycoprotein

342 • Fungal Skin Diseases

antigens or mycelial suspensions of M. canis were given by intradermal injection or skin
scarification, respectively, to normal cats and cats that had recovered from M. canis
dermatophytosis, all previously infected cats experienced immediate and delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions. By comparison, the control cats did not experience delayed-type
hypersensitivity reactions and, uncommonly (20% of animals), experienced immediate
hypersensitivity reactions.w 93
There is no correlation between circulating antibodies and protection. Cats that had
recovered from previous M. canis infections experienced either no clinical lesions or
lesions that were more inflammatory and transient (25 days) than those in M. canis-naive
cats. 93 It is believed that the cell-mediated immune response is the mainstay of the body
against fungal infection. This is corroborated by the increased incidence of fungal infections in patients with various acquired or inherited forms of immunosuppression, such as
FeLV infection, FIV infection, and cancer; poor nutrition and anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive drug therapy (such as glucocorticoids) also lead to an increased incidence.P 30. 43. 57 The stress of pregnancy and lactation may increase susceptibility to fungal
infection. 3o • 66 The presence of ectoparasites, especially fleas and Cheyletiella mites, can be
important in the establishment and spread of dermatophytosis in catteries and multiple-cat
households.w "
Genetic influences probably play an important role in the transmission and clinical
course of feline dermatophytosis." The common belief that long-haired cats are more
commonly affected than are shorthaired cats may reflect less efficient grooming of the
haircoat or genetic breed predispositions (e.g., Persians and Himalayansl.v?

CLINICAL FINDINGS
When clinicians rely on clinical signs alone, dermatophytosis (ringworm, tinea) is greatly
overdiagnosed, especially in dogs. In most studies of skin diseases in dogs and cats, the
incidence of dermatophytosis is low, accounting for only 0.26% to 5.6% of all cases
examined." A striking exception was reported from the Dermatology Service at the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil, where dermatophytosis accounted for about 30% of all
feline skin cases examinedl'" The analysis of cultures submitted from suspected dermatophytosis cases in dogs and cats generally reveals that between 2.1% and 40% (average,
15%) are positive.P: 17, 27, 48, 49, 88 Several other dermatoses, especially staphylococcal folliculitis and demodicosis, mimic the classic ringworm lesion. On the other hand, dermatophytosis is a diagnosis that is often missed because of the protean nature of the dermatologic
findings .13, 28, 37, 40. 43
Because the infection is almost always follicular in dogs and cats, the most consistent
clinical sign is one or many circular patches of alopecia with variable scaling. 13, 43 Some
patients may experience the classic ring lesion with central healing and fine follicular
papules and crusts at the periphery. However, signs and symptoms are highly variable and
depend on the host-fungus interaction and, therefore, the degree of inflammation. Pruritus is usually minimal or absent; however, it is occasionally marked and suggests an
ectoparasitism or allergy. This is especially true with "miliary dermatitis-like" M. canis
infections in cats and Trichophyton and M. persicolor infections in dogs. In addition,
dermatophytosis may be complicated by secondary bacterial (usually staphylococcal) infection. In vitro studies have shown that dermatophytes can produce antibiotic substances
and encourage the development of penicillin- resistant staphylococci.I" 50
Dog

Dogs more often exhibit the classic annular areas of peripherally expanding alopecia, scale,
crust, and follicular papules and pustules (Fig. 5-lA to D). However, less common
syndromes are frequent enough that dermatophytosis should be considered in the differ-

"See references 17, 19,28,29,40,49,56,86.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 343
ential diagnosis of any annular, papular, or pustular eruption. Symmetric nasal or facial
folliculitis and furunculosis, mimicking autoimmune skin disease (e.g., pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceus), may be caused by a dermatophyte, especially T. mentagrophytes
(Fig. 5-2; also see Fig. 5-1E and F) and M. persicolor (Fig. 5-3). Trichophyton infections may also present as folliculitis and furunculosis affecting one paw or one leg (see
Fig. 5-1G). These infections often scar Significantly.
A seborrhea-like eruption with greasy scale may occur with generalized infections.
The dermatophyte kerion is a boggy, exudative, variably well-circumscribed, nodular type
of furunculosis that develops multiple draining tracts. It is often associated with M.
gypseum or T. mentagrophytes infections and occurs most commonly as a solitary lesion
on the face or a distal limb (see Fig. 5-1H). Onychomycosis is rare!': it is usually
associated with T. mentagrophytes and may present as an asymmetric (one digit or
multiple digits on one paw) paronychia or onychodystrophy. Widespread collarettes, erythema, and scales without hair follicle involvement was produced by Trichophyton ajelloi
infection in a dog. 23 Severe dermatophytosis and dermatophytic pseudomycetoma with
marked lymph node involvement was reported in a young Yorkshire terrier in association
with M. canis infection.P
In general, the nature of the dermatophyte cannot be determined from the clinical
presentation. Dermatophyte infections are most often localized, with lesions occurring
most commonly on the face, pinnae, paws, and tail.
Whereas dermatophytosis is usually a disease of young animals (< 1 year
old),13· 27, 43, 49, 89 sylvatic ringworm (that acquired from wild mammals) is more common in
adults. 13, 89 M. persicolor is an increasingly recognized cause of dermatophytosis in Europe,18, 20, 22, 89 where it typically produces facial lesions that may be predominantly scaly or
papulopustular and crusty; in addition, concurrent depigmentation of the nasal planum
and nostrils may occur. Extensive dermatophytosis in older dogs may be associated with
concurrent immunosuppressive diseases (e.g., cancer, hyperadrenocorticism) or inappropriate systemic glucocorticoid therapy (Fig. 5-4A and B),13, 43, 56 Yorkshire terriers of any age
seem to be susceptible to severe forms of dermatophytosis associated with M. canis
infection. In Europe, it has been reported that dermatophytosis occurs more commonly in
the Jack Russell terrier (especially sylvatic), Yorkshire terrier (especially M. canis), and
Pekinese (especially M. canis). 13, 27, 89 German shorthaired pointers were predisposed to M.
gypseum infections in one study.-"
Cat

Feline dermatophytosis most often appears as one or more irregular or annular areas of
alopecia with or without scales (see Fig. 5-4C and D),13, 28, 37, 43 Hairs in these areas often
appear broken and frayed. Follicular hyperkeratosis may result in exaggerated hair follicle
openings or comedo formation. The alopecia may be severe and widespread, accompanied
by little evidence of inflammation. Cats occasionally have more inflammatory areas of
folliculitis characterized by alopecia, erythema, scale, crust, and follicular papules (see Fig.
5-4E and F). The so-called miliary dermatitis, which is characterized by an often pruritic,
widespread, papulocrustous dermatitis, is an uncommon manifestation of dermatophytosis
that is usually caused by M. canis. Recurring chin folliculitis resembling feline acne or a
dermatitis of the dorsal tail resembling "stud tail" may occur. 13, 30 Onychomycosis is rare--,
it is usually caused by M. canis and may present as an asymmetric (one digit, or multiple
digits on one paw) paronychia or onychodystrophy (see Fig. 5-4G). Generalized seborrhea-like eruptions can be visible, wherein dry or greasy scales are prominent. The
condition is usually due to M. canis.
Widespread, pruritic, exfoliative erythroderma occasionally occurs in association with
M. canis (see Fig. 5-4H). Some cats groom lesions vigorously (pruritus?) and can produce
very erythematous, indurated, eroded lesions within 48 hours that resemble eosinophilic
plaques." Dermatophyte kerion reactions occasionally occur in the cat, as do cases of
otitis extema due to M. canis .13 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma has been reported only
in Persian cats; it is characterized by one or more subcutaneous nodules that are often

FIGURE 5-1. See legend on opposite page

344

Fungal Skin Diseases • 345

FIGURE 5-2. Extensive facial dermatitis in a dog caused
by T. mentagrophytes.

FIGURE 5-3. Chronic facial dermatitis with areas of hyperpigmentation and depigmentation in a dog
caused by M. persicolor. (Courtesy
D. Carlotti.)

FIGURE 5-1. Dermatophytosis. A, German shepherd puppy with annular inflammatory lesions below the eye and cranial
to the pinna caused by M. canis. (Courtesy B. Farrow.) B, Pointer puppy with well-circumscribed areas of alopecia and
grayish crusts ahove the eyc and on the pinna caused by M. canis. C, Annular, erythematous, oozing, pruritic lesion
resembling pyotraumatic dermatitis on a Poodle caused by M. canis. D, Crusted follicular papules and pustules on the
bridge of the nose of a dog caused by M. persicolor. (Courtesy D. Carlotti.) E, Collie with a crusting, erosive, alopecic
dermatitis on the bridge of the nose caused by T. mentagrophytes. F, Coonhound with a highly inflammatory nasal
dermatitis caused by T. mentagrophytes. G, Severe pododermatitis in a Beagle caused by T. mentagrophytes. H, Kerion on
the digit of a dog caused by M. gypseum. Note the pinpoint draining tracts.

FIGURE 5-4. Dermatophytosis. A, Chronic widespread dermatitis in an old dog caused by T. mentagrophytes.
Note the strikingly well-circumscribed nature of the lesions. B, Close-up of the dog in A showing the erythematous papulovesicular dermatitis. C, Classic "ringworm" lesions on the left pinna and dorsal to the left eye in a
Siamese cat caused by M. canis. D, Multiple annular areas of alopecia and grayish crusts on the face of a cat
caused by M. canis. E, Well-circumscribed areas of alopecia and erythema on the muzzle and left front paw of a
cat caused by T. mentagrophytes. F, Closer view of the paw lesion in E. G, Brownish paronychial exudate,
leukonychia, and onychorrhexis in a cat caused by M. canis. H, Generalized exfoliative erythroderma in a Persian
cat caused by M. canis. (Courtesy G. Wilkinson.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 347
ulcerated and discharging. The nodules occur most commonly over the dorsal trunk or tail
base (Fig. 5-5A and B). These cats may have more typical, superficial dermatophyte
lesions on other areas of the body, or they may be clinically normal except for the
nodules.42a. 52. 56, 61, 64 Lesions of M. canis infections in a hypotrichotic Rex cat were
characterized by annular areas where hairs were darker and longer than normal."
In general, the nature of the dermatophyte cannot be determined from the clinical
presentation. Lesions are most common on the head, pinnae, and paws. 12, 17, 35, 43, 46
Generalized dermatophyte infection is more common in cats than in dogs. 13, 49 As with
dogs, dermatophytosis is more common in young cats «1 year 0Id),13, 27, 48, 49, 89 but
sylvatic ringworm is more common in adults.P: 89 Longhaired cats, especially Persians and
Himalayans, are predisposed to this infection.i" 30, 49, 86, 89
Zoonotic Aspects
Prior to the 1990s, about 30% of all cases of Microsporum infections and about 15% of all
cases of dermatophytosis (tinea) in humans were reported to be caused by M. canis, the
vast majority of these infections being acquired from cats.P: 85 However, a 1998 report
indicated that M. canis was isolated from only 3.3% of the cases of dermatophytosis in
humans in the United States." M. canis continues to be the most common dermatophyte
isolated from humans in Italy.62 Approximately 50% of humans exposed to symptomatic or
asymptomatic infected cats acquire the infection." In about 30% to 70% of all households
with infected cats, at least one person in the household becomes infected.P 40, 85
The cutaneous changes with animal-origin dermatophytosis in humans are variable
and most commonly occur on areas of the body that contact infected animals, such as the
arms, scalp, and trunk (see Fig. 5-5C),13, 85 Other dermatophytes (M. gypseum, M.
persicolor, T. mentagrophytes) are rarely, if ever, transmitted from dogs and cats to
humans,

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for dermatophytosis is extensive as a result of the variable
clinical appearance of the disease, Because most infections are follicular, the primary
differential diagnoses are staphylococcal folliculitis and demodicosis. In dogs, staphylococcal folliculitis is much more common than dermatophytosis.13, 43, 86 In fact, the following
adage is useful regarding dogs: "If it looks like ringworm, it is probably not! It is probably
staphylococcal folliculitis." In cats, however, dermatophytosis is more common than demodicosis and staphylococcal folliculitis. Other causes of annular areas of alopecia, crusts, and
variable inflammation include pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus, Pelodera dermatitis,
flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, seborrheic dermatitis, subcomeal pustular
dermatosis, and the various sterile eosinophilic folliculitides. Although alopecia areata and
pseudopelade produce annular areas of alopecia, the alopecic skin appears otherwise
normal. Dermatophyte kerions may resemble other infectious or foreign-body granulomas,
acral lick dermatitis, or neoplasms such as histiocytoma, mast cell tumor, and lymphoma,
Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma must be differentiated from other infectious or foreignbody granulomas, sterile panniculitis, and various neoplasms.
History-taking may be of limited value unless exposure is known to have occurred;
this is so because clinical dermatophytosis is so variable and the incubation period is
incompletely defined (in general, 4 days to 4 weeksl.P: 28, 33 The number, types,
and sources of contact animals should be determined. The source of kittens and
puppies presented for examination should be ascertained because animals from some
breeding establishments, pet shops, or animal shelters may have a high incidence of
infection. Evidence for contagion-in other animals or human contacts-should be
sought.
Fungal tests are useful in diagnosis. These tests are described in detail in Chapter 2.
Wood lamp examination for fluorescence causes only certain strains of M. canis, M.
audouinii, M. distortum, and Trichophyton schoenleinii to produce a positive yellow-green

348 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-5. Dermatophytosis and yeast infections. A, Ulcerated nodules (dermatophytic pseudomycetoma) over the back of a cat due to Trichophyton sp. B, Close-up of lesion in A. C, Annular erythema and
scaling with a slightly raised papulovesicular border in a human caused by M. canis. D, Candidiasis in a dog.
Legend continued on opposite page

Fungal Skin Diseases • 349

color on infected hairs.P Only about 50% of M. canis infections fluoresce." Several
important pitfalls exist in the use and interpretation of the Wood lamp results (see
Chap. 2).
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs and scraped scales may reveal hyphae and
arthrospores in 40% to 70% of the cases, and it is definitive evidence of dermatophytosis
(Fig. 5-6A) (see Chap. 2).13, 17,27,28.43,66 M. persicolor and Epidermophyton floccosum do
not invade hairs and could be called true epidermophytes.P: 18, 20, 22
Fungal culture of affected hair and scales is the most reliable diagnostic test and is
the only way to identify the specific dermatophyte.l" 17,28.43,66 Caution is warranted here,
however, because dermatophytes may be cultured from the haircoat and skin of normal
cats and dogs as well as those with nonfungal skin diseases. These dermatophyte isolates
may reflect a true carrier state or recent exposure to a contaminated environment (e.g.,
hunting dogs and M. gypseum).
False-positive and false-negative results are possihle.P" 27, 88, 89 Cultures may be negative when microscopic examination of hairs is positive.s'' Although dermatophyte test
medium is widely used and recommended for culturing dermatophytes.!" 43, 56, 66 some
mycologists have reported it to be unreliable and inferior to Sabouraud's dextrose agar,13,
27 In addition, some M. canis isolates do not produce the initial red color change on
dermatophyte test medium.i" 66,78 Culturing asymptomatic cats and dogs requires using a
brush (toothbrush, hairbrush, surgical scrub brush) or carpet square method (see
Chap. 2),13, 28, 37. 66, 67, 88 Surface keratin must be harvested in order to culture M.
persicolor.
Biopsy findings are as variable as the clinical lesions, and they are not as sensitive as
culture.": 13, 43 On the other hand, when the true significance of a cultural isolation is
questioned, demonstration of the organism in biopsy specimens is definitive proof of true
infection. Histopathologic examination is most useful in the nodular forms of dermatophytosis-the kerion and pseudomycetoma. It may be impossible to culture the organism in
such cases by collecting hair and scales. The most common histopathologic patterns
observed in dermatophytosis are (1) perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furunculosis (see Figs.
5-6B, 5-7, and 5-8), (2) hyperplastic or spongiotic superficial perivascular or interstitial
dermatitis with prominent parakeratotic or orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of the epidermis
and hair follicles, and (3) intraepidermal pustular dermatitis (suppurative, neutrophilic
epidermitis). When hair follicles are serially damaged by necrotizing and pyogranulomatous inflammation (the "domino effect") (see Fig. 5-8), dermatophytosis is the most likely
diagnosis, and every hair shaft must be inspected for the presence of fungal hyphae and
arthroconidia, which are often sparse in number.
In cats, M. canis infections may be associated with a hydropic interface folliculitis/
dermatitis pattern wherein fungal elements are few (Fig. 5-9). In M. persicolor infections,
fungal hyphae are found only in the surface keratin (Fig. 5_10)18. 29 Dermatophytic
pseudomycetoma is characterized by nodular to diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous panniculitis and dermatitis wherein the fungus is present as broad (2.5 to 4.5 }Lm),
hyaline, septate hyphae, chainlike pseudohyphae, and large (12 }Lm) chlamydospore-like
cells within granules (pseudogranules) (Figs. 5-11, 5-12, and 5-13).
In dogs with Trichophyton spp. infection, the reaction pattern can include marked
epidermal and/or follicular acantholysis with or without concurrent lichenoid interface
'See references 9, 13, 17,28,38,56,66,89.

FIGURE 5-5. Continued Note the whitish gray plaque on the cheek and the linear lesion on the tongue. (Courtesy N.
Field.) E, Candidiasis in a dog. Multiple whitish gray, mucoid plaques on markedly erythematous interdigital skin. F,
Malassezia dermatitis. Note the symmetric, greasy, erythematous dermatitis in a Poodle. (Courtesy K. Mason.) G, Malassezia dermatitis secondary to atopy and glucocorticoid therapy in a Lhasa apso. Note erythema, alopecia, hyperpigmentation,
lichenification, and yellowish crusts in the axilla and on the medial forearm. H. Malassezia dermatitis in intertriginous areas
of an English bulldog. Note moist, erythematous, alopecic dermatitis of the ventral neck.

350 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-6. A, M. canis-infected dog hair in mineral oil. Anatomy of hair is destroyed and
arthroconidia are numerous. B, Follicularly oriented inflammation in a cat with dermatophytosis.

dermatitis, thus being easily confused with pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceus (Fig.
5_14).23,76,80 In such cases, fungal elements may only be present in surface and follicular
keratin, not in hair shafts. In cats with alopecia that clinically does not appear to be
inflammatory, biopsy findings often reveal enormous numbers of arthrospores and hyphae
associated with infected hairs, minimal lymphohistiocytic perivascular dermatitis or no
apparent inflammation, and minimal orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. Septate fungal hyphae
and spherical to ovoid arthrospores may be present in and around infected hairs, in hair
follicles, and within the stratum corneum of the surface epidermis, The number of fungal

Fungal Skin Diseases • 351

FIGURE 5-7. M. canis in a cat. Note arthroconidia surrounding hair shaft (AOe stain).

FIGURE 5-8. Kerion. Severe pyogranulomatous furunculosis. Five consecutive pilosebaceous units are severely affected (the "domino effect").

352 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-9. A, Cell-poor hydropic interface dermatitis associated
with M. canis infection in a cat. Pilosebaceous units are not involved. B,
Close-up of surface keratin in A.
Note occasional fungal hyphae (arrow).

FIGURE 5-10. M. persicolor infection in a dog. Fungal hyphae in
surface keratin (PAS stain).

Fungal Skin Diseases • 353

FIGURE 5-11. Subcutaneous dermatophytosis in a cat (Trichophyton sp.). Diffuse panniculitis with
tissue grains.

elements present is often inversely proportional to the severity of the inflammatory response.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Dermatophytosis in healthy dogs and shorthaired cats often undergoes spontaneous remission within 3 months.P: 43, 58, 71 Animals with generalized dermatophytosis, however, usually

FIGURE 5-12. Close-up of panniculitis in Figure 5-11. Note numerous
tissue grains (arrow).

354 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-13. Subcutaneous dermatophytosis (Trichophyton sp.), Numerous hyphae with bulbous dilatations (GMS stain).

(but not always)58, 60. 66 require aggressive therapy. Even longhaired cats can undergo
spontaneous resolution, but it may take lY2 to 4 years. 58. 66 In general, sylvatic ringworm
(especially M. persicolor and Trichophyton spp.) in dogs does not spontaneously resolve
and requires aggressive therapy,13, 18,43 However, it has been reported that several cases of
T. mentagrophytes infection in cats resolved spontaneously.P
The goals of therapy are (1) to maximize the patient's ability to respond to the
dermatophyte infection (by the correction of any nutritional imbalances and concurrent
disease states and by the termination of systemic anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drugs), (2) to reduce contagion (to the environment, other animals, and humans), and
(3) to hasten resolution of the intection.P: 28. 38 A critical feature of clinical management is
the treatment of all dogs and cats in contact with the infected animal and treatment of
the environment.P: 28. 30. 38. 41. 43, 66, 71

Tapical Therapy
Every confirmed case of dermatophytosis should receive topical therapy. 13, 28. 38, 41, 43, 58
Hair is clipped from a wide margin (6 em) surrounding all Iesions.P: 43. 47 Clipping should
be gentle (using scissors or No, 10 clipper blade) so as to avoid traumatizing the skin
and encouraging the spread of infection." Longhaired animals should be clipped entirely.28, 30. 43. 58. 66 Although clipping may spread the lesions, it is more important to get rid
of infected hairs,28. 38. 69, 71 Owners should be warned that the lesions may worsen 7 to 10
days after clipping,41, 71 Clipped hair is carefully disposed of. Veterinary practices and
grooming parlors are strongly advised against extensive clipping of infected animals on the
premises because contamination of the room is likely,28. 38 Owners should use clippers at
home, where the environment is already contaminated, Clipping should be performed in
an area of the home/cattery/shelter that is easy to disinfect.
Creams and lotions are available for use on focal lesions, and these are typically
applied every 12 hours, to include a 6-cm margin of clinically normal skin, if possible, A
wide variety of topical antifungals is available, and there is no particular advantage of one
product over another (Table 5-3). For highly inflamed lesions, a product containing

Fungal Skin Diseases • 355

FIGURE 5-14. T. mentagrophytes infection in a dog. A, Interface dermatitis with intracomeal
pus and cellular crust. B, Close-up
of surface crust in A. Note numerous acantholytic keratinocytes (arrow). C, Close-up of surface keratin. Note sparse fungal hyphae
(arrow) (PAS stain).

356 • Fungal Skin Diseases
• Table 5-3

PRODUCTS FOR THE TOPICAL TREATMENT OF
SUPERFICIAL MYCOSES

PRODUCT

INDICATION*

Spot Treatment
Amphotericin B 3% cream, lotion
Chlorhexidine 4% spray
Clotrimazole 1% cream, lotion
Clotrimazole 1%/betamethasone 0.1% cream
Clotrimazole 1%/betamethasone 0.3%/gentamicin ointment
Miconazole 2% cream, 1% lotion, 1% spray
Miconazole 2% spray
Naftifine 1% cream, gel
Nystatin cream
Nystatin/triamcinolone cream, ointment
Terbinallne 1% cream
Thiabendazole 4% dexamethasone

Fungizone (Apothecin)
ChlorhexiDerm Maximum (DVM)
Lotrimin (Schering)
Lotrisone (Schering)
Otomax (Schering)

C,M
C,D,M
C,D,M
C,D,M
C,D,M

Conofite (Mallinckrodt)
Miconazole Spray (EVSCO)
N aftin (Allergan)
Mycostatin (Squibb)
Panalog (Solvay)
Lamisil (Novartis)
Tresaderm (Merck Ag Vet)

C,D,M
C,D,M
C,D
C,M
C,M
C,D
C,D,M

ChlorhexiDerm (DVM)
Seba-Hex (EVSCO)
Hexadene (Allerderm/Virbac)
ChlorhexiDerm Maxi (DVM)
Dermazole (Virbac)
Miconazole (EVSCO)
Su!£tOxyDex (DVM)

C,M
C,M
C,M
C,M
C,M
C,M
C,M

(Vinegar: Water)
Imaverol (Janssen)
LymDyp (DVM)

C,M
C,D,M
C,D,M

Shampoost
Chlorhexidine 2%
Chlorhexidine 2%
Chlorhexidine 2%
Chlorhexidine 4%
Miconazole 2%
Miconazole 2%
Sulfur 2%/Benzoyl peroxide 2.5%

Rinses
Acetic acid 2.5%
Enilconazole 0.2%
Lime sulfur 2%

·C = candidiasis: D = dermatophytosis; M = Malassezia dermatitis.
t Shampooing may disperse more anthrospores into the haircoat and environment, and is not recommended in dermatophytosis.

glucocorticoid in combination with antifungal agents may hasten resolution of clinical
disease. However, because the glucocorticoid can be absorbed systemically, it is not
recommended in the treatment of very young kittens and puppies or pregnant queens and
bitches. Clipping and spot-treatment of dogs with focal lesions is usually curative. 13. 29. 43. 58
For dogs and cats with multifocal or generalized skin involvement, antifungal rinses
(dips) are indicated. Cats that have focal lesions should also be given this treatment
because they inevitably have or soon will have widespread to generalized infected hairs
but are often asymptomatic.w 58. 66. 71 Rinses are preferred because the entire body surface
can be treated, rubbing of the haircoat is minimized, and the antifungal agent can be
allowed to dry on the skin. Rinses should be applied twice weekly. Lime sulfur 2% and
enilconazole 0.2% are the most effective.P: 29. 38. 41, 71, 95 Shampoos are less desirable
because (1) they have no residual action and (2) the physical act of their application and
removal may macerate fragile hairs and increase the release and dispersal of infective
spores into the coat, thus increasing the likelihood of spreading the infection and of
human exposure.v- 71 Topical medicaments are continued until two or preferably three
fungal cultures at weekly intervals are negative." See page 409 for details on topical
antifungal agents.
Local hyperthermia was reported to be effective therapy for focal dermatophyte
lesions in dogs and cats." However, such therapy is not readily accessible, it requires
chemical restraint, and it is impractical for multifocal or generalized disease.
Systemic Therapy

Dogs and cats that have multifocal lesions, all longhaired animals, and those in multiple
animal settings should receive systemic antifungal therapy. Animals that are not responding to topical therapy after a 2- to 4-week course of treatment should also receive

Fungal Skin Diseases • 357
• Table 5-4

PRODUCTS FOR THE SYSTEMIC TREATMENT OF
SUPERFICIAL MYCOSES

PRODUCT

Griseofulvin
Microsized"
Ultramicrosized t
Fluconazole]
Itraconazole §
Ketoconazole'[

DOSE (mg/kg)

INTERVAL

25-60
2.5-15
10-20
10
20
10
20

q12h
q12h
q12h
q24h
q48h
q24h
q48h

°Fulvicin UlF (Schering).
tGris-PEG (Herbert).
[Diflucan (Roerig).
§Sporanox (Janssen).
1lNizoral (Janssen).

systemic therapy (Table 5_4).29, 43, 58 Griseofulvin is the drug of choice." Dosage and
frequency protocols vary widely. Side effects are uncommon and generally mild in dogs;
they may be more common and potentially severe in cats, however. Anecdotal reports
indicate that Persians, Himalayans, Siamese, and Abyssinians may be predisposed to side
effects,3D. 41, 66 but we have not experienced this. Side effects are especially severe in cats
with FIV infection, so griseofulvin probably should be avoided in these cats.38, 41, 58, 66
Griseofulvin is a teratogen and must never be used during the first two thirds of pregnancy. It is advisable to not use recently treated males for breeding." See page 410 for
details concerning the use of griseofulvin in dogs and cats.
Ketoconazole is effective in the treatment of dermatophytoses in dogs and
cats.P: 28, 29. 43, 58, 59 However, ketoconazole is not labeled for use in dogs and cats in the
United States, and most veterinarians reserve this drug for cases in which griseofulvin
resistance is encountered or when the patient cannot tolerate griseofulvin.!3. 43, 58, 66 Although concern has been expressed about the efficacy of ketoconazole against M. canis 43
and a report has indicated that about 50% of the M. canis isolates from cats showed in
vitro resistance to ketoconazole.s! such concerns and in vitro findings have not been
corroborated either clinically or by other in vitro studies.P: 28. 44 See page 412 for details
on the use of ketoconazole in dogs and cats.
Itraconazole is effective for the treatment of dermatophytoses of dogs and cats. 28,54,
58,69 However, it is not labeled for use in dogs and cats in the United States. Itraconazole
may be useful when griseofulvin resistance or toxicity are encountered or when animals
cannot tolerate ketoconazole. See page 413 for details concerning the use of itraconazole
in dogs and cats.
It is important to remember that systemic antifungal therapy does not rapidly reduce
contagion and is always to be used in conjunction with clipping and topical antifungal
agents. t In addition, fungal cultures continue to be positive for at least 2 weeks and
sometimes longer after clinical cure. 33, 36. 38, 69, 71 It is recommended that therapy be
continued until three successive fungal cultures, performed at weekly intervals by a brush
technique, are negative. 36 , 71 This usually requires 4 to 20 weeks of therapy. The successful
treatment of infected claws always requires systemic antifungal agents (usually for 6 to 12
months) or onychectomy.P 43, 58
Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma in cats is often frustrating to treat. Lesions usually
recur after wide surgical excision, and griseofulvin and ketoconazole are often ineffective
or only partially effective.!3. 43, 52. 58, 64 One cat with dermatophytic pseudomycetoma was

"See references 28, 30, 41, 43, 58, 66, 69.
[See references 13, 28, 38, 41, 43, 58, 66.

358 • Fungal Skin Diseases
cured after 10 months of treatment with itraconazole, and another eat's disease was
controlled after 18 months. 58 , 6 1 A young Yorkshire terrier with dermatophytic pseudomycetoma with multiple lymph node involvement associated with M. canis infection did not
respond to griseofulvin, ketoconazole, or itraconazole.P
Anecdotal reports indicate that terbinafine is effective and safe for the treatment of
dermatophytosis in dogs and cats (see page 415 for details).
Vaccination

Fungal vaccines (lyophilized, modified live fungus) have been successful in Europe in the
management of endemic dermatophytoses in cattle and foxes.13, 34 In 1994, a killed M.
canis vaccine (Fel-O-Vax MC-K, Fort Dodge Laboratories) was released for the treatment
and prevention of dermatophytosis in cats. To date, there is still no published scientific
information on this product, and we do not recommend it. We as well as others'" have
received anecdotal reports from cat breeders that, when the commercial M. canis vaccine
was used, cats that already were clinically infected often experienced a worsening of
clinical signs and that allegedly uninfected cats in the same cattery "broke" with clinical
signs. The latter observation most likely represents an augmentation of immune responsiveness producing more inflammatory lesions in cats that had subclinical infections.P'
Moriello and associates70 and DeBoer and colleagues'" have conducted extensive
studies with a killed M. canis vaccine in laboratory cats. Intradermal injections produced
immediate- and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions in cats with active M. canis infections and those that had recovered from M. canis infections but not in normal unexposed
cats. 32 , 70 In placebo-controlled studies, cats given the killed M. canis vaccine had high
titers of anti-M, canis immunoglobulin G (lgG) (similar to those produced by natural
infections) and increased lymphocyte blastogenic responses to M. canis antigen (lower
responses than those produced by natural infectionsl.P': 35 However, all cats experienced
dermatophytosis when inoculated with M. canis or when an M. canis-infected cat was
introduced into the colony. Again, there is presently no good evidence to suggest that any
killed M. canis vaccine has any preventive or therapeutic properties!
Chronic and recurring cases of dermatophytosis are usually associated with (1) inappropriate therapy, including wrong drug or wrong drug dosage; inadequate duration of
therapy; failure to use topicals, failure to clip the haircoat; failure to treat all other animals
in the house; and failure to treat the environment, (2) underlying diseases (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, FeLV infection, FIV infection, or cancer), (3) immunosuppressive drug therapy, or (4) the genetic background of the patlent.P: 29, 38, 41, 43, 57 A
resistant strain of dermatophyte is theoretically possible but extremely rarely documented.
Trichophyton spp. infections in dogs may be difficult to clear with griseofulvin. 76
Management of Catteries and Multiple-Cat Households

The elimination of dermatophytosis in a cattery or other multiple-cat facility requires the
separation of carriers from noncarriers, the treatment or destruction of infected animals,
and the institution of measures to prevent re-infection of the premises.s" 30, 66 Successful
elimination of dermatophytosis requires aggressive systemic and topical therapy, interruption of breeding programs and show campaigns, isolation of the colony, environmental
decontamination, and the testing and isolation of future cattery or household members.
Such control programs are complicated by the cost of medical expenses, by the loss of
revenue from the sale of cats and kittens, by the time commitment and effort required,
and by the fear of permanent damage to the reputation of the cattery. This fear is often
the most difficult obstacle to overcome.
M. canis is the dermatophyte involved in almost all cattery and multiple-cat household
infections, especially in longhairs. 13, 38, 43, 66 However, both M. gypseum and T. mentagrophytes have been responsible for cattery dermatophytosis when the cats were housed in
screened porch buildings or outdoor runs.P" In catteries where M. canis infection has been
present for over 60 days, the dermatophyte can be isolated from coat brushings of all cats,
whether they have clinical lesions or not. 43 , 66, 89

Fungal Skin Diseases • 359
Control options include three general approaches.s? 38, 66 The first requires total
depopulation of the cattery or household, decontamination of the facility, and repopulation
with only animals that test negative on three consecutive brush cultures performed at 2week intervals. Most breeders reject this because of the loss of their gene pool. The
second approach requires treatment of the entire colony and facilities with appropriate
topical medications, systemic therapy, and environmental clean-up. The colony is isolated,
and breeding and showing are interrupted. The third option is to treat only the kittens.
This is practical only for catteries, pet shops, or kitten mills that produce kittens for the
pet cat market. The following recommendations have been reprinted, with slight modification, from Moriello's excellent article.w

Specific Recommendations for the Treatment of Infected Catteries

• Treatment of Cats
1. Perform toothbrush fungal cultures on all cats in the cattery and all animals in the
household.
2. Isolate any animals that are found to be free of M. canis. These animals should be
quarantined in a separate facility. Reculture these animals because they will probably be found to be infected with M. canis when recultured.
3. Isolate the cattery. Cats should not be sold, shown, or sent on breeding loans. New
members should not be added, and breeding programs should be interrupted.
4. Clip the entire haircoat of all cats, especially those of longhaired cats. Be sure that
all whiskers are clipped. Clipping should be performed in a room that is easy to
decontaminate. The infected hairs should be burned or transferred to a plastic
biohazard bag and autoclaved prior to disposal." The individual performing the
clipping should be dressed in disposable clothing to prevent infection from animal
to human. Clipping should be repeated every month until the infection is eliminated.
5. Begin aggressive topical therapy with an antifungal dip (lime sulfur or enilconazole
are preferred), Ideally, cats should be treated twice a week. The haircoat should be
kept short.
6. Initiate oral griseofulvin therapy in all nonpregnant queens and kittens older than
12 weeks of age. Topical therapy should be continued. Monitoring complete blood
counts and platelet counts in all cats, and especially in Persians, Himalayans,
Abyssinians, and Siamese cats, is highly recommended. Many clients refuse to have
precautionary blood work performed because of the cost. Be sure to warn clients
clearly of the potential for toxicity.
7. The duration of treatment varies and may last from weeks to months (at least 12 to
16 weeks)." Continue treatment until all cats are culture-negative, using the toothbrush technique three times at weekly intervals. False-positive cultures can occur
in cats that are clinically recovered, and cured of dermatophytosis, if they are living
in a contaminated environment.s" 71
8. If a griseofulvin-resistant strain is suspected, confirm that the client is administering the griseofulvin correctly. If so, submit an M. canis culture for griseofulvin,
ketoconazole, and itraconazole sensitivity testing. It may be necessary to contact
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to locate the appropriate laboratory for performance of the testing.

• Environmental Decontamination. The critical role of premise disinfection in
eradication of M. canis from an endemic cattery or household cannot be overemphasized. 38, 71 Even when a regular disinfection schedule was employed, the environment
became severely contaminated (floors, walls, all inanimate objects in room).36 This probably explains why all cats in such environments became culture-positive: They are constantly being contaminated from their environment. Whether such cats are truly infected
by or only passively carrying M. canis is irrelevant because the presence of fungal elements on the haircoat is a potential human health hazard.

360 • Fungal Skin Diseases
1. M. canis spores remain viable in the environment for up to 18 months. All
nonporous surfaces should be thoroughly vacuumed and disinfected, including all
floors, walls, countertops, windowsills, and transport vehicles. Sodium hypochlorite
0.5%, when added to a suspension of M. canis arthrospores for 5 minutes, prevented fungal growth on culture media." Sodium hypochlorite 0.5%, when added
to M. canis-infected cat hairs for 5 minutes twice weekly, prevented fungal growth
only after 8 "treatments."95 When 10 disinfectants were tested at various dilutions
as Single applications to a surface contaminated with M. canis-infected cats' hairs
and spores, only undiluted bleach (5.25% sodium hypochlorite) or 1% formalin
were able to inactivate infected cat hairs within 2 hours.P Enilconazole was effective within 8 hours.P When 14 disinfectants were repeatedly applied to isolated M.
canis-infected cats' hairs, stabilized chlorine dioxide (Oxygene, Oxyfresh USA,
Spokane, WA), glutaraldehyde and quaternary ammonium chloride (GPC 8, Solomon Industries, Cocoa, FL), potassium monoperoxysulfate (Virkon, S. Durvet, Blue
Springs, MO), and a 0.525% sodium hypochlorite were the most effective." Undiluted bleach is corrosive and irritating and cannot be safely used in homes or
catteries. Because of its human health hazards, formalin solution is not recommended for routine use in disinfecting premises. Enilconazole sprays and "foggers"
have been used successfully in Europe.s" 38. 41
2. Destroy all bedding, rugs, brushes, combs, and the like.
3. Rugs that cannot be destroyed or removed should be washed with an antifungal
disinfectant. Be sure to recommend that the client test for colorfastness. Steam
cleaning of carpets has been recommended as a method of decontamination. To
kill fungal spores, the temperature of the water being forced into the carpets must
be at least 43.3°C (110°F). Five do-it-yourself machines were tested to determine
whether this was possible, To reach a temperature of 43.3°C (110°F) at the carpet
level, the water chamber had to be filled with water exceeding 76.6°C (170°F). In
a household situation, achieving this required boiling water to reach this temperature. Unfortunately, the temperature of the water rapidly cooled in the clean water
reservoir, and within 15 minutes of filling the chamber, the temperature of the
water being forced out of the nozzle was less than 37.7°C (100°F). Steam cleaning
of carpets may therefore not be a reliable method of killing M. canis unless an
antifungal disinfectant such as chlorhexidine or sodium hypochlorite is added to the
water.
4. All heating and cooling vents should be vacuumed and disinfected. Furnaces
should be cleaned with high-power suction equipment by a commercial company.
Furnace filters should be changed weekly.
5. The cattery should be vacuumed daily, preferably twice daily. Do not use fans.
6. Cages should be disinfected daily.
7. Remind the cattery owner to disinfect all portable cages, automobiles, and so forth.
8. Do not let the cats roam freely in the house or cattery .
• Treatment of Kittens Only. In some situations, a cattery owner may be unable or
unwilling to treat the entire cattery. If the owner is interested only in producing kittens
that are not infected with M. canis, an alternative strategy is available. Although this
strategy is not ideal, it is a reasonable alternative to depopulation and to the sale of M.
canis-infected kittens to the public.

1. Isolate breeding and pregnant queens from the remainder of the cattery.
2. Clip the haircoat of the queens.
3. Treat the queens topically with lime sulfur or enilconazole dips twice weekly.
4. After the kittens are born, begin oral griseofulvin therapy in queens. Although
griseofulvin is contraindicated in pregnant queens, some feline practitioners have
routinely begun administering griseofulvin during the last week of pregnancy and
have not observed any ill effects.
5. Wean the kittens as soon as possible, preferably by 4 weeks of age, and isolate

Fungal Skin Diseases • 361

them from all other cats. Some cattery owners choose to separate the kittens from
the queens at birth and to raise them in isolation.
6. When the kittens are 4 weeks of age, culture all of them with a sterile toothbrush.
Pending fungal culture results, begin topical therapy. Lime sulfur and enilconazole
have been reported to be safe in young kittens. If the fungal culture indicates that
the kittens are infected, begin oral griseofulvin therapy. Oral griseofulvin is not
recommended for use in kittens less than 12 weeks of age, although there is no
specific product label contraindication to this practice; it has, however, been used
in kittens as young as 6 to 8 weeks of age without any ill effects. 13. 28 The potential
for griseofulvin toxicity should be thoroughly explained to the owner.
7. Kittens should not be sold until at least one, and preferably two, negative fungal
cultures have been obtained.
• Monitoring Response to Therapy. Response to therapy in both cats and kittens
is best monitored via fungal culturing. The toothbrush culturing technique is recommended. It is critical that the brushing be aggressive during this period. During treatment, the number of infective spores decreases, and if the individual sampling is not
aggressive enough with combing, false-negative results could be obtained. Do not use a
Wood lamp to monitor therapy because this device is much less reliable than culturing.
• Preventive Measures. The prevention of the introduction or re-introduction of M.
canis into a cattery requires the isolation of any new cats, the isolation of cats returning
from shows or breeding loans, and periodic culturing of the entire colony. Cats entering
or re-entering the cattery should be cultured for M. canis and kept in isolation until the
results are obtained. It is suggested that these cats be dipped or washed with one of the
previously mentioned products during this isolation period to minimize contamination of
the cattery in the event that they are infected. It is difficult to decontaminate the
environment, and re-infection is possible. Ideally, there should be no visitors to the cattery
so that introduction of the organism from clothing or other fomites can be prevented.
Cat shows present a tremendous threat to an M. canis- free cattery because it is
extremely difficult to prevent re-infection and to prevent exposure to spores." The cats
should be groomed in an area free of other cats, if possible, and no grooming equipment
from other exhibitors should be used. The cat carriers should be covered when cats are
not being examined by the judges.

Candidiasis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Candida spp. yeasts are normal inhabitants of the alimentary, upper respiratory, and
genital mucosa of mamrnals.lrA 9, 96. 101. 102 Candida spp., especially Candida albicans and
Candida parapsilosis, are isolated from the ears, nose, oral cavity, and anus of clinically
normal dogs and dogs with candidiasis. 97 - 105 Candida tropicalis, Candida pseudotropicalis,
Candida krusei, Candida stellatoidea, and Candida guilliemwndii are occasionally found.
Candida species cause opportunistic infections of skin, mucocutaneous areas, external ear
canal, and claws. Factors that upset the normal endogenous microfl.ora (prolonged antibiotic therapy) or disrupt normal cutaneous or mucosal barriers (maceration, bums, indwelling catheters) provide a pathway for Candida spp. to enter the body. 101, 102 Once in the
body, further spread of infection correlates with cell-mediated immunocompetence and
neutrophil function.t'"- 102 Immunosuppressive disease states (diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, viral infections, cancer, inherited immunologic defects) or
immunosuppressive drug therapy predispose some animals to candidiasis. ioi, 102 Candida
spp. produce acid proteinases and keratinases (degrade stratum corneum) and phospholipases (penetration of tissuesl.l'"
Candidiasis has been reported under the following names in earlier literature: candidosis, moniliasis, and thrush.

362 • Fungal Skin Diseases
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Candidiasis is a rare disease with a distinct predilection for mucous membranes (see Fig.
5-5D), mucocutaneous junctions, or areas in which moisture may persist and macerate
the skin, such as the external ear canal and lateral pinnae, intertriginous areas, the
clawbed, and interdigital areas (see Fig. 5-5£).97, 100-102 Pruritus may be intense.102 On
mucous membranes, the lesions appear as foul-smelling, nonhealing ulcers covered with
thick, whitish gray plaques with erythematous borders. 13, 102 On the skin, lesions
are initially papular and pustular and evolve into oozing erythematous plaques and
ulcers. 90, loa. 102, 104
Candida infection should always be suspected in a dog with erythema and oozing
affecting one or two paws when there has been no response to antibiotics and glucocorticoids." Solitary or locally grouped lesions may resemble pyotraumatic dermatitis or staphylococcal infection. loa, 105 In two dogs, the lesions were more hyperkeratotic and crusted,
affecting especially the nose, face, pinnae, genitalia, and footpads. 97, 104 One dog experienced three nodules on the neck and lateral thighs associated with Candida zeylanoides
after injections of calcium gluconate. 103 Candidiasis isolated to the clawbeds is rare.'!
Candidiasis rarely presents as a mucocutaneous ulcerative disorder.P
Cat

Candidiasis involving the skin is extremely rare in cats. Lesions include erythema, erosions, ulcers, crusts, and oozing in intertriginous areas, paws, and mucocutaneous junetions." Bilateral, ulcerative otitis externa has been reported.l'" One cat experienced vesicles and ulcers of the mucocutaneous areas of the nose, lips, prepuce, and anus, as well as
the oral cavity, after 2 weeks of tetracycline therapy for an upper respiratory infection."
Nystatin therapy was curative.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for localized forms of candidiasis includes pyotraumatic dermatitis, staphylococcal infection, and intertrigo. Mucocutaneous candidiasis must be differentiated from immunologic diseases (e.g., pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, systemic lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme), drug
eruptions, necrolytic migratory erythema, thallium poisoning, epitheliotropic lymphoma,
and other unusual infections (leishmaniasis, protothecosis, phaeohyphomycosis). Cytologic
examination of direct smears reveals suppurative inflammation and numerous yeasts (2 to
6 JLm in diameter) and blastoconidia (budding cells).1-3, 9, 10, 101, 102 Pseudohyphae may
occasionally occur, In contrast with Malassezia pachyderrnatis, Candida spp. show narrowbased and multilateral budding. 102 Biopsy findings include suppurative epidermitis, parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, and occasionally suppurative superficial folliculitis. Numerous
yeasts and blastoconidia are present in the keratin of the surface epidermis and infundibular portion of hair follicles (Fig. 5-15). Pseudohyphae and true hyphae may also occur.
Candida species grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25° to 30°C. The API 20C system
is a convenient and reliable system for identification.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Correction of predisposing causes is fundamental. Excessive moisture must be avoided.
For localized lesions, clipping, drying, and topical antifungal agents are usually effective.
Useful topical agents include nystatin (100,000 Ulg), azoles (2% miconazole, 1% clotrimazole), 3% amphotericin B, gentian violet (1: 10,000 in 10% alcohol), and potassium permanganate (1: 3000 in water) .13, 101, 102 These agents should be applied two to three times
daily until lesions are completely healed (1 to 4 weeks).
Oral, widespread mucocutaneous, and generalized lesions require systemic antifungal
therapy.lOl, 102 Although intravenous amphotericin B is effective, ketoconazole or itracona-

Fungal Skin Diseases • 363

FIGURE 5-15. Candidiasis in a dog. Numerous yeasts and
pseudohyphae in hair follicle. (Courtesy M. Pichler-Schick.)

zole administered orally is the drug of choice.Pl- 102 Therapy should be continued for 7 to
10 days beyond clinical cure (2 to 4 weeks).

Malassezia Dermatitis

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Malassezia pachydermatis (M. canis, Pityrosporum pachydermatis, P. canis) is a lipophilic,
non -lipid-dependent, non mycelial saprophytic yeast that is commonly found on normal
and abnormal skin, in normal and abnormal ear canals, on mucosal surfaces (oral, anal),
and in the anal sacs and vagina of normal dogs and cats.P: ll3, 134, 135, 138, 138a, 139, 146
M. pachydermatis can be isolated from the skin of 3-day-old puppies.P" It is possible that
mucosal carriage plays a role in skin colonization and infection through licking and
grooming. Topical treatments of Basset hounds with Malassezia dermatitis produced significantly reduced population sizes and frequency of isolation of M. pachydermatis from the
skin and the oral cavity.l25 This might indicate that oral carriage reflects contamination of
the mucosae by constant seeding from a reservoir of the yeast on the skin. Alternatively,
reduced yeast counts in the mouth could have resulted from a direct antiyeast effect by
transfer of the topical agent to the oral mucosae by licking.
Recent advances in electrophoretic karyotyping have shown that the genus Malassezia
contains six lipid-dependent species (M. furfur [Po ovale), M. globosa, M. obtusa, M.
restricta, M. slooffiae, and M. sympodialis) and one non -lipid-dependent species (M.
pachydermatis).106, 108. 135, 136 Malassezia sympodialis and M. globosa have been isolated
from the skin and external ear canal of healthy cats. ll8, 122 In one study, Malassezia spp
were isolated more frequently from cats infected with FeLV ancllor FIV.13a
The diversity of M. pachydermatis isolates from a wide variety of hosts was investigated, and seven types or strains (sequevars), Ia through Ig, were identified. 105a, 137, 138, 146a

364 • Fungal Skin Diseases
The predominant sequevar, type la, appeared to be ubiquitous, whereas type Id was
exclusively recovered from dogs. None of the seven sequevars correlated with isolation
from healthy skin or a particular lesion (otitis externa or dermatitis). In addition, this study
indicated that the skin of a given animal may be colonized by more than one type of M.
pachydermatis. A recent study identified a strain that was different from the seven
previously described and two isolates that more closely resembled M. furfur. 105a
Malassezia pachydermatis is a commensal on canine and feline skin and in the
external ear canal. It is thought to have a symbiotic relationship with commensal staphylococci, wherein the organisms produce mutually beneficial growth factors and microenvironmental alterations that are mutually beneficial. 138, 146 Hence, it is not surprising that
dogs with Malassezia have increased numbers of S. intermedius on their skin 112. 115 and
frequent concurrent staphylococcal pyodermas.P': 134 Trypsin-sensitive proteins or glycoproteins on yeast cell walls are important for adherence to canine corneocytes,'!" and
mannosyl-bearing carbohydrate residues on canine corneocytes serve as ligands for adhesins expressed by M. pachydermatis,u9 There is variability among strains of the organism,
however. 119. 124 Enhanced adherence of M. pachydermatis to corneocytes does not appear
to be important in the pathogenesis of Malassezia dermatitis in Basset hounds. 120
Because M. pachydermatis does not invade subcorneally, dermatitis is hypothesized to
result from inflammatory and/or hypersensitivity reactions to yeast products and antigens. 138, 146 Virulence factors for M. pachydermatis have not been characterized. It has
been shown that M. pachydermatis isolated from dogs with dermatitis and otitis extema
produces proteases, lipases, lipoxygenases, phosphatases, phosphohydralases, glucosidase,
galactosidase, leucine arylamidase, urease, and zymosan. 108a, 130, 138, 145, 146 These substances
could contribute to the pathogenesis, inflammation, and pruritus of Malassezia dermatitis
through proteolysis, lipolysis, alteration of local pH, eicosanoid release, and complement
activation. Malassezia strains from healthy dogs contain Significantly greater amounts of C4
esterase activity.l08a
The protein fractions of M. pachydermatis isolates from dogs with Malassezia otitis
externa or Malassezia dermatitis were investigated by gel electrophoresis.l'" A number of
protein bands were identified, and there were no statistical differences in terms of the
number of protein bands and their molecular weight values between isolates from the ear
or the skin. Neither is there any clear association between the particular protein(s)
expressed and the origin of the Malassezia strain (e.g., normal versus infected dogs).108a
Western immunoblotting identified 14 bands of immunoreactivity, and there were significantly more bands in Basset hounds with Malassezia dermatitis than in healthy Basset
hounds, Beagles, and Irish setlers. 108a
Histologically, Malassezia dermatitis is often characterized by prominent exocytosis of
lymphocytes (CD3-positive) and a subepithelial accumulation of mast cells, which suggest
a hypersensitivity reaction.v" Immediate intradermal skin test reactivity to M. pachydermatis antigens was reported in 30% of 46 dogs with "seborrheic dermatitis"149 and all
atopic dogs with concurrent Malassezia dermatitis,147, 148 whereas all normal dogs and
atopic dogs without concurrent Malassezia dermatitis did not react. In humans, concerns
have been raised over the number of in vitro cross-reactions between commercial house
dust mite allergen extracts and M. furfur. 157 Because the substrates for house dust mite
cultures usually contain human skin scales, M. furfur organisms might be in the mite
cultures. However, cross-reactivity between M. pachydermatis antigens and house dust
mite or mold antigens was not found.>"
Hypersensitivity to Malassezia antigens is also thought to be important in atopic
humans. 140, 146 The levels of M. pachydermatis-specific IgG (by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) were Significantly greater in dogs with Malassezia dermatitis than
in normal dogs.123 One investigator found Significantly higher levels of specific IgG (by
ELISA) in atopic dogs-with or without concurrent Malassezia dermatitis-than in nonatopic dogs with Malassezia dermatitis or normal dogs. 15o
Many predisposing factors have been hypothesized to allow the commensal M. pachydermatis to become a pathogen.126, 134, 138, 144, 146 Increased humidity is probably important
because Malassezia seems to be more common in humid climates (e.g., summer) and in

Fungal Skin Diseases • 365

certain anatomic locations (e.g., ear canals, skin folds). Skin folds were thought to be the
predisposing factor in 16% to 28% of the canine cases in two studies. 126, 134 Increased
availability of yeast nutrients and growth factors are also probably important: hormonal
alterations of the quantity and quality of sebum, "seborrheic" skin (keratinization disorders), increased populations of commensal symbiotic staphylococci.
Immunologic dysfunction-especially as concerns cell-mediated immunity and
secretory IgA-could play a role in the pathogenesis of M. pachydemwtis infection. 126. 134. 144. 146 Chronic glucocorticoid therapy could have a precipitating role here.
Healthy Basset hounds and Beagles experienced Significantly greater in vitro lymphocyte
blastogenic response to M, pachydemwtis antigen than did Basset hounds with Malassezia
dermatitis.F' Serum titers of M. pachydemwtis-specific IgG and IgA (measured by
ELISA) in Basset hounds and other breeds with Malassezia dermatitis exceeded those of
healthy Basset hounds and Beagles, suggesting that serum antibody responses confer no
protection against Malassezia infection.V' Widespread Malassezia dermatitis in cats has
been associated with concurrent FIV infection.P 98. 144 thyrnoma.P! and pancreatic adenocarcinoma.P'' As mentioned previously, hypersensitivity to M. pachydemwtis antigens
likely plays an important role in many dogs.
Genetic predisposition would appear to be important because certain breeds-especially the West Highland white terrier, Basset hound, American Cocker spaniel, Shih Tzu,
English setter, and Dachshund-are at Significantly increased risk for Malassezia dermatitis.U5. 138. 146. 151
It is commonly stated that Malassezia dermatitis in dogs is usually secondary to an
ongoing skin disorder, predominantly hypersensitivity diseases (especially atopy), keratinization defects ("seborrhea"), recurrent bacterial pyodermas, and endocrine diseases (especially hypothyroidismj.P 138, 144. 146 Indeed, 72% to 83% of the dogs with Malassezia
dermatitis in two large studies had dermatoses that preceded the occurrence of yeast
infection. 134. 146 However, the significance of these "underlying" diseases remains to be
delineated.P" In one study, the prevalence of atopy, primary keratinization defects, and
endocrinopathies in dogs with Malassezia dermatitis was comparable with that in dogs
seen for dermatologic disease, in general. ll5
It has been shown that numbers of cutaneous M. pachydemwtis are Significantly
greater in the groin, interdigital spaces, ear canals, and directly under the tail base of
atopic dogs than in normal dogs. 109. UO, 157 In addition, normal dogs are Significantly more
likely to have negative cultures for M. pachydemwtis than atopic dogs.155 Atopic dogs with
interdigital erythema had Significantly higher numbers of yeast in interdigital scrapings
than did atopic dogs without interdigital erythema.P? It is certainly possible that any
dermatosis that results in disruption of the stratum corneum barrier-be that mechanical
as a response to pruritus or biochemical as a result of keratinization, endocrinologic, and
immunologic abnormalities-could permit the subcorneal immune system and inflammatory cascades to be exposed to Malassezia antigens and products.
It has been suggested that canine Malassezia dermatitis is often associated with prior
antibiotic therapy.13. 138, 144. 146, 151 This has not been sufficiently corroborated. In fact,
unlike Candida spp., Malassezia populations are not subject to the inhibitory effects of
bacteria.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Malassezia dermatitis is common in dogs." It occurs in dogs of any age, sex, and breed.
The following breeds are predisposed: West Highland white terrier, Basset hound, American Cocker spaniel, Shih Tzu, English setter, and Dachshund. us, 138. 146. 151 The dermatitis
often begins in the summer or highly humid months, which also correspond to the allergy
season (pollens, molds), and then persists into winter. Over 70% of the dogs have
'See references 5, 126, 129, 134, 138, 143, 144, 146.

366 • Fungal Skin Diseases
concurrent dermatoses, especially allergies, keratinization defects, endocrinopathies, and
bacterial pyodermas.Pv 146
Pruritus is a major sign and is virtually constant. Dogs with generalized skin disease
(exfoliative erythroderma) are erythematous, greasy or waxy, scaly (yellow or slate gray),
and crusty. They often have an offensive, rancid, or yeasty odor (Fig. 5-16A; see Fig.
5-5F, G, and H). Chronic cases can have marked lichenification and hyperpigmentation.
Regional dermatitis occurs on the ears, lips, muzzle, interdigital spaces, ventral neck,
medial thighs, groin, axillae, perianal region, and intertriginous areas. Focal scaly plaques
and erythematous macules and patches may coalesce into serpiginous tracts. Some dogs
may have a contact dermatitis-like disease, with remarkably well-demarcated ventral
distribution ("waterhne disease"). Others have a papulocrustous dermatitis resembhng
superficial staphylococcal infection or interdigital furuncles ("cysts"). Malassezia paronychia
and/or claw infections produce red-brown discoloration of paronychial hairs or claws (see
Fig. 5_16B).133 Occasionally, the dog is presented for so-called frenzied fits of nose and
lip scratching with the front paws. Otitis extema associated with Malassezia infection is
discussed in Chapter 19.
Remember that most dogs with Malassezia dermatitis have concurrent dermatoses. 126• 134. 144. 146 In addition, about 40% of the dogs with Malassezia dermatitis have
concurrent staphylococcal pyoderma.P" 134
Cat

Malassezia dermatitis (M. pachydermatis) is rarely reported in cats; when found, it may be

associated with a black and waxy otitis extema (see Chap. 19), recalcitrant feline chin
acne, refractory paronychia, and a generalized erythematous, scaly to waxy dermatitis
(exfoliative erythroderma) (Figs. 5-17, 5-18),13· 98.138.144 Recurrent, generalized Malassezia dermatitis has been observed in cats with FlY infection.P" 144 in one cat with a
thymoma, 131 and in one cat with paraneoplastic alopecia associated with a pancreatic
adenocarcinoma.P" Malassezia sympodialis was consistently isolated from the ears of a
group of cats with mild otic pruritus and mild to moderate accumulations of yellow to
brown cerumen in the external ear canals.U" Signs of inflammation were not present. M.
furfur was isolated from the ears in one of 33 normal cats.l 28a
Zoonotic Aspects
Malassezia pachydermatis has been cultured from the blood, urine, and cerebrospinal
fluid of low-birth-weight neonates that were receiving intravenous lipid emulsions in an
intensive care facility.P? An identical strain of M. pachydermatis was cultured from one
health worker and pet dogs. These problems were terminated when handwashing procedures were enforced.

DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis is extensive and includes atopy, food hypersensitivity, flea bite
hypersensitivity, drug eruption, superficial staphylococcal folliculitis, demodicosis, feline
acne, scabies, acanthosis nigricans, contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, and epitheliotropic lymphoma. The diagnosis can be even more perplexing for the clinician because
Malassezia dermatitis is often associated with one or more of the potential differential
diagnoses. Malassezia dermatitis should be considered a factor in any scaly, erythematous,
greasy to waxy, pruritic dermatitis in which other differential diagnoses have been eliminated by diagnostic tests and there is a lack of response to treatment (e.g., glucocorticoids,
antibiotics, antiseborrheic shampoos, insecticides, miticides).
The most useful and readily available tool for the clinician presented with a suspected
case of Malassezia dermatitis is cytologic examination. 126. 134. 138. 144. 146 Samples of surface
scale or grease are gathered by making a superficial skin scraping, vigorously rubbing a
cotton swab on the skin surface, pressing a piece of clear cellophane tape onto lesional
skin several times, or pressing a section of a clean glass microscope slide on the skin. 13 • 134.
144. 146 It is not clear which of these methods is the best, and each has its own benefits and

FIGURE 5- 16. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Alopecia, erythema, and
yellowish brown, crumbly surface debris. B, M. pachydermatis infection of dog's claw. The red-brown discoloration
of the distal and proximal claw is caused by the infection. The normal area of claw in between represents the time
period when the dog was being treated with ketoconazole. C, Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Truncal nodule that is
multifocally ulcerated. D, Phaeohyphomycosis in a dog. The ulcerative dermatitis on the ventral abdomen and
medial thighs is more or less symmetric. (Courtesy K. Kwochka.) E, Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Numerous
greenish brown fungal elements in granulomatous dermatitis. F, Pythiosis in a dog. Swollen paw with multiple areas
of necrosis and ulceration. (Courtesy D. Chester.) G, Ulcerated nodules over the lumbosacral area of a dog with
pythiosis. (Courtesy C. Foil.) H, Sporotrichosis in a Dalmatian. Widely scattered crusted plaques (hair has been
clipped around each lesion).

367

368 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-17. Malassezia dermatitis in a cat. A, Alopecia,
erythema, and accumulation of dark brown waxy material in perianal region. (Courtesy D. Carlotti.) B, Malassezia paronychia in a
cat. (Courtesy C. TieghL)

shortcomings. Superficial scrapings are reliable but can be difficult to perform in certain
areas (interdigital spaces, facial folds). Tape strips are good where the skin surface is flat
and not overly waxy or greasy. Direct impression with a glass slide is good for flat surfaces
and where grease and wax are plentiful. Cotton swab (Q- Tip) smears are good for ears,
interdigital spaces, and facial folds. In normal dogs, impression smears, skin scrapings, and
swabs gave similar results.P" Other investigators found scrapings and tape strippings to be
superior to swabs. 109. 157 Still others have found tape stripping to be unsatisfactory.P'
Results of a study on dogs with Malassezia pododermatitis indicated no statistically significant difference between the numbers of yeasts recovered with superficial scrapings, tape
strippings, and direct impressions.l'" However, swabs were Significantly inferior to the
other three techniques.l'"

FIGURE 5-18. Malassezia dermatitis in a cat. Patchy alopecia,
scaling, crusting, and accumulations
of dark brown waxy debris on medial
surface of forearm, (Courtesy D.
Carlotti.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 369

Whichever method is used, all material is transferred to a glass slide, heat-fixed (not if
cellophane tape has been usedl), and stained for cytologic examination. Heat fixing can be
avoided by using a direct stain such as New Methylene Blue. One looks for yeasts that are
round to oval or the classic peanut shape. Malassezia pachydermatis is characterized by
monopolar budding of daughter cells from one site on the cell wall, formation of a
prominent bud scar or collar at the site of daughter cell development, a peanut shape,
and a diameter of 3 to 8 ILm. 138 Yeasts are often visible in clusters or adhered to
keratinocytes (Fig. 5-19). Malassezia sympodialis has a more rounded, bulbous shape and
a narrower-based monopolar budding, and it is smaller than M. pachydermatis.
The full diagnostic value of cytologic examination remains to be determined. An
extensive study of normal dog skin sampled by impression smears, skin scrapings, and
swabs revealed that most specimens contained less than 10 organisms/1.25 ern- (0.5 in 2) of
sample (median value of one organism per samplel.P? Another study of normal and
affected skin of dogs with various dermatoses, sampled by impression smears, revealed
that normal skin had less than one organism/high-power field (HPF), whereas affected
skin had less than one organism/HPF (80% of samples) or one to three organisms/HPF
(20% of samplesl.l'"
Other investigators consider that Malassezia dermatitis is more likely when greater
than 10 organisms are visible in 15 randomly chosen oil-immersion microscopic fields
(1000x) using tape strip samples.l'" when an average of greater than or equal to four
organisms are visible per oil-immersion microscopic field,134 when an average of greater
than or equal to one organism is visible in 10 oil-immersion microscopic fields,126 or when
greater than two organisms/HPF (400X) are found with any of the commonly used
sampling techniques.!"
Swabs taken from claw beds revealed the following: an average of 0.44 organisms/oilimmersion field in normal dogs; an average of 0.44 organisms/oil-immersion field in dogs
with pedal pruritus; and an average of 7.9 organisms/oil-immersion field in dogs with
atopy, pedal pruritus, and red-brown staining of claws and/or paronychial skin. 133 Further

FIGURE 5-19. Superficial skin scraping from a dog with Malassezia dermatitis. Numerous budding yeasts
among the squames.

370 • Fungal Skin Diseases
confusion is added by the following findings: M. pachydermatis numbers are significantly
larger (1) on healthy Basset hounds than on healthy Irish setters.v? (2) in the ears of
laboratory Beagles than in the ears of pet dogs of several breeds.P" (3) on pet Beagles
than on other pet dogs,113 and (4) on healthy Basset hounds than on healthy mongrels.!"
In addition, population size and frequency of isolation of M. pachydermatis vary on
different body sites. 113, 121 Clearly, there is great variability in diagnostic criteria used and
significant differences between breeds and body sites.
Skin biopsy findings in dogs are characterized by a superficial perivascular-to-interstitial dermatitis with irregular hyperplasia, diffuse spongiosis, and diffuse lymphocytic exocytosis of the epidermis and follicular infundibulum (Figs. 5-20, 5_21).134.146 Parakeratosis
is prominent (Fig. 5-22), and dermal inflammatory cells are dominated by lymphocytes,
histiocytes, and plasma cells. Eosinophils, neutrophils, and mast cells are common. Yeasts
are visible in surface and/or infundibular keratin in about 70% of cases (see Fig. 5-22).
They are randomly distributed. Eosinophilic epidermal microabscesses may be visible in
about 14% of cases, and mast cells are linearly aligned at the dermoepidermal junction in
about 47% of cases (Fig. 5_23).146 Signs of concurrent bacterial infection (suppurative
epidermitis and folliculitis) are eommon.P'- 146
Uncommonly, yeasts may be visible in association with suppurative folliculitis and
pyogranulomatous furunculosis (especially chin and feet) (Fig. 5-24). In cats, one may see
a hydropic interface dermatitis wherein lymphocytes and eosinophils are the dominant
inflammatory cells. It must be remembered that yeasts are occasionally visible on the
surface of biopsies from numerous canine and feline dermatoses and yet play no known
role in their pathogenesis or treatment.153, 154 Yeasts present in hair follicles, however,
must always be assumed to be possibly pathogenic.
The majority of intraepithelial and dermal lymphocytes in dogs with Malassezia dermatitis are CD3-positive (T cells).146 Immunofluorescence testing revealed immunoglobu-

FIGURE 5-20. Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Superficial interstitial dermatitis with parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, spongiosis, and lymphocytic exocytosis,

Fungal Skin Diseases • 371

FIGURE 5-21. Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Epidermal hyperplasia, spongiosis, and exocytosis of lymphocytes.

lin deposited in the intercellular spaces or basement membrane zone in 10% and 23%,
respectively, of the cases examined.P"
Malassezia pachydermatis is usually easy to culture.l-" 111, 117, 135, 138 Because it is not
lipid-dependent, it grows well on routine Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 32° to 37°C.
However, some strains of M. pachydermatis do show poor growth on unsupplemented
media.P" An atmosphere containing 5% to 10% carbon dioxide significantly increased the
frequency of isolation and colony counts on Sabouraud's dextrose agar but not on modified Dixon's agar. 117 The lipid-dependent Malassezia spp. will not grow on Sabouraud's
dextrose agar and require alternative, supplemented media.U" 122, 138 Modified Dixon's
agar grows all Malassezia Spp.ll0, 111, 118, 122, 138 Because Malassezia spp. are
commensal organisms, their isolation in culture is of little or no practical diagnostic
value.l?" 146
Ultimately, the diagnosis of Malassezia dermatitis rests on the response to antiyeast
treatment.P- 107, 126, 134, 138, 144, 146 We have seen dogs with classic historical and clinical
findings wherein various surface sampling techniques demonstrated little or no yeast, yet
these dogs responded completely to specific treatment. These cases truly emphasize the
hypersensitivity nature of this disease in some patients.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The treatment of Malassezia dermatitis is individualized according to severity and various
dog and owner considerations. Although topical therapy is often effective, this can be
difficult in large dogs, in dogs with long or thick haircoats, in obstreperous dogs, or for

372 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-22. Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Budding yeasts in surface keratin (arrow).

elderly or physically challenged owners. A combination of topical and systemic therapy
would be the most rapidly and totally effective.
Focal areas of Malassezia dermatitis (e.g., skin fold) may be easily treated with
the daily spot application of an antifungal cream, ointment, lotion, or spray (see page
409).142. 144, 146 Multifocal or more generalized cases are treated with total body applications of shampoos and/or rinses (see page 41O),u2, 126. 134, 138, 141, 144, 146 Miconazole 2%
(Dermazole, Miconazole Shampoo), chlorhexidine 3% (Hexadene) or 4% (ChlorhexiDerm Maximum), and combinations of 2% miconazole and 2% chlorhexidine are
excellent shampoos. If the animal is very greasy, waxy, and scaly, these shampoos should

FIGURE 5-23. Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Linear alignment of
mast cells at the dermoepidermal
junction (AOG stain).

Fungal Skin Diseases • 373

FIGURE 5-24. A, Malassezia dermatitis in a dog. Suppurative luminal folliculitis and follicular keratosis. B, Close-up
of A. Note numerous yeast bodies in follicular keratin (arrow).

be preceded by a keratolytic degreasing shampoo. Alternatively, selenium sulfide 1%
shampoo is keratolytic, degreasing, and antiyeast all in one. For stubborn cases,
twice-weekly shampoos can be followed by leave-on rinses such as lime sulfur 2%
(LymDyp), acetic acid 2.5% (one part water: one part vinegar), or enilconazole 0.2%
(Imaverol) .126. 134, 138. 144, 146 Enilconazole is not licensed for use in the United States.
Wherein topical therapy is unsuccessful or undesirable, the oral azoles are effective. The most commonly used drug is ketoconazole (Nizoral) at 10 mglkg q24h
PO.13, 133, 134, 138, 146 Itraconazole and fluconazole are effective but expensive. Griseofulvin
and the allylamine antifungals are not effective.
Dramatic clinical improvement occurs within 7 days with combined systemic and
topical therapy, within 7 to 14 days with systemic therapy alone, and within 14 days with
topical therapy alone. Therapy should be continued for 7 to 10 days beyond clinical cure,
An average duration of treatment would be 4 weeks.
Because most cases of Malassezia dermatitis are associated with concurrent dermatoses, recognition and control of these possible predisposing factors may be critical to
success and prevention of recurrent yeast infections. Additionally, concurrent staphylococcal infections are frequent and require specific antibiotic therapy.
Recurrent cases of Malassezia dermatitis are not uncommon. If the recurrences are
infrequent, they can be treated as described earlier. Frequent recurrences may require
the administration of "maintenance" topicals (shampoos and/or rinses) on a once- or twiceweekly basis or even oral ketoconazole every 3 days.
The development of ecologically based forms of therapy and prophylaxis, such as the
use of inhibitors of the in vivo adherence process, are highly desirable.P' However, given

374 • Fungal Skin Diseases

the apparent variability among strains of M. pachydermatis, it may prove difficult to find a
universal inhibitor of adherence.Pv 138
Atopic dogs with Malassezia dermatitis showed immediate skin test reactivity to M,
pachydermatis antigens, whereas atopic dogs without Malassezia dermatitis had negative
skin test reactions.v" This, in conjunction with the lack of cross-reactivity with mold and
house dust antigens, suggests that immunotherapy with M, pachydermatis antigens may be
a useful therapeutic measure in the future, 148
Surgical removal of a thymoma resulted in spontaneous remission of exfoliative dermatitis associated with M. pachydermatis in a cat. 131

Piedra
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Piedra is an asymptomatic fungal infection of the extrafollicular portion of the hair shaft
caused by Piedraia hortae ("black piedra") and Trichosporon beigelii ("white piedra").'
White piedra has been described in a dog,159 White piedra is most common in the
temperate climates of South America, Europe, Asia, Japan, and the southern United
States, The source of the infection is unknown, and direct transmission is thought to be
rare,

CLINICAL FINDINGS

Whit~ piedra was reported in an l l-year-old black Cocker spanlel.P" The dog had whiteto-gray concretions on and encircling the hair shafts around the lips (Fig. 5-25). The
"nodules" were soft to the touch. The animal was otherwise healthy.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes trichorrhexis nodosa, trichomycosis axillaris, hair casts,
and various developmental defects of hair shafts. Microscopic examination of affected hairs
shows nodules up to a few millimeters in diameter on and encircling the hairs shafts (Fig.
5-26). These nodules may result in a weakening and breakage of infected hair shafts.
Microscopic examination of infected hairs reveals extrapilar and intrapilar hyphae arranged
perpendicularly to the hair surface. Septate hyphae and arthroconidia (3 to 7 p,m in
diameter) may be visible. Trichosporon beigelii (T. cutaneum) grows readily on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C but is inhibited by cycloheximide.

FIGURE 5-25. Piedra in a dog,
White concretions on the hairs of a
black Cocker spaniel. (Courtesy M.
Pereiro-Miguens.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 375

FIGURE 5-26. Piedra in a dog.
White material encircling hair shafts.
(Courtesy of M. Pereiro-Miguens.)

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
In humans, the condition is cured by shaving off the hair." Spontaneous remissions are
common.

Rhodotorulo Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Rhodotorula spp. are normal inhabitants of the skin, ear canal, and alimentary tract. 1, 2, 158
These yeastlike fungi are opportunistic pathogens of immunosuppressed patients.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Rhodotorula dermatitis appears to be extremely rare. One cat had erythematous dermatitis
with adherent brown-red, doughy crusts on the nasal planum, nostrils, bridge of the nose,
periocular region, and one digit (Fig. 5 - 27) .158 Rhodotorula mucilaginosa was isolated in
culture. The cat was positive for FeLV and FIV.

DIAGNOSIS
Biopsy revealed an interstitial dermatitis with ovoid, yeastlike organisms in the dermis.P"
Rhodotorula spp. grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
A cat treated with ketoconazole orally for 4 months was still in remission 18 months
later. 158

• SUBCUTANEOUS MYCOSES
The subcutaneous (intermediate) mycoses are fungal infections that have invaded the
viable tissues of the skin. I - 6 • 9, 10 These infections are usually acquired by traumatic
implantation of saprophytic organisms that normally exist in soil or vegetation. The lesions
are chronic and, in most cases, remain localized. The terms used to refer to the subcuta-

376 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-27. Rhodotorula dermatitis in a cat. A, Alopecia, erythema, and crusting on the nose and
muzzle. (Courtesy P. Bourdeau.) B,
Alopecia and erythema of digit.
(Courtesy P. Bourdeau.)

neous mycoses have been contradictory, confusing, and frequently changing. The term
chromomycosis includes subcutaneous and systemic diseases caused by fungi that develop
in the host tissue in the form of dark-walled (pigmented, dematiaceous) fungal elements.v 5, 6, to Chromomycosis is separated into two forms, depending on the appearance
of the fungus in tissues. In phaeohyphomycosis, the organism appears as septate hyphae
and yeastlike cells. In chromoblastomycosis, the fungus is present as large (4 to 15 }Lm in
diameter), rounded, dark-walled cells (sclerotic bodies, chromo bodies, Medlar bodies).
A mycetoma is a unique infection wherein the organism is present in tissues as
granules or grains. 3 , 5, 6, 10 Mycetomas may be eumycotic or actinomycotic. The etiologic
agents of eumycotic mycetomas are fungi, whereas actinomycotic mycetomas are caused
by members of the Actinomycetales order, such as Actinomyces and Nocardia, which are
bacteria (see Chap. 4). Eumycotic mycetomas may be caused by dematiaceous fungi
(black-grained mycetomas) or nonpigmented fungi (white-grained mycetoma). Pseudomycetomas have differences in granule formation and are caused by dermatophytes (dermatophytic pseudomycetoma) or bacteria such as Staphylococcus (bacterial pseudomycetoma
or botryomycosis).
The term hyalohyphomycosis has been proposed to encompass all opportunistic infections caused by nondematiaceous fungi (at least 19 genera), the basic tissue forms of these

Fungal Skin Diseases • 377
being hyaline hyphal elements that are septate, branched or unbranched, and nonpigmented in tissues.s 10. 233
Another term that creates confusion is phucomucosie.> 5, 6. 10 The class Phycomycetes
no longer exists. Pythiosis (oornycosis) and zygomycosis are now the preferred terms for
phycomycosis. Members of the genus Pythium are properly classified in the kingdom
Protista and in the phylum Oomycetes, The phylum Zygomycota includes the orders
Mucorales and Entomophthorales. The term zygomycosis is used to include both mucormycosis and entomophthoromycosis.

Eumycotic Mycetoma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The fungi causing eumycotic mycetoma in dogs and cats are ubiquitous soil saprophytes
that cause disease via wound contamination.v 5. 10, 164 The condition occurs most frequently
near the Tropic of Cancer between the latitudes 100S and 30 0N, including Africa, South
and Central America, India, and southern Asia. The disease is rare in the United States
and Europe. The most commonly reported fungus causing eumycotic mycetoma in the
United States is Pseudoallescheria hoydii.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
The three cardinal features of eumycotic mycetoma (maduromycosis) are tumefaction,
draining tracts, and grains (granules) in the discharge.v" 10. 164 Lesions are usually solitary
and occur most commonly on the limbs and face (Fig. 5-28A and B). Early papules
evolve into nodules that are often painful. As lesions enlarge, they develop draining tracts
that exude a serous, purulent, or hemorrhagic discharge. As some fistulas heal, scar tissue
develops and forms the hard, tumor-like mass that characterizes mycetoma. Grains present
in discharge vary in color, size, shape, and texture, depending on the particular fungus
involved (Fig. 5-29). Black- or dark-grain mycetomas are usually associated with Curvulana geniculata, occasionally with Madurella grisea and Torula Sp.161, 166 White-grain
mycetomas are usually caused by Pseudoallescheria (Allescheria, Petriellidium) hoydii and
occasionally Acremonium hyalinum. 160 • 163-165 Chronic infections can extend into underlying
muscle, joint, or bone. Pyogranulomatous panniculitis in a dog was caused by Phialemonium curvatum. 162

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious and foreign-body granulomas and neoplasms.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation
with occasional fungal elements. Fungi are easily seen by squashing and examining grains.
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis
and panniculitis. Fungal elements are present as a grain (granule, thallus) within the
inflammatory reaction (Fig. 5-30). The grains (0.2 mm to several millimeters in diameter)
are irregularly shaped, often taking a scalloped or scroll-like appearance, and consist of
broad (2 to 6 /Lm in diameter), septate, branching hyphae, which often form chlamydoconidia, and a cementing substance." The fungal elements may be pigmented or nonpigmented. The fungi grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C. Either tissue grains or
punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture (see Chap. 2).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice. 163, 164 In some cases, amputation of an
affected limb is necessary. Any attempt at antifungal chemotherapy should be based on in
vitro susceptibility testing of the isolate.v 164 Medical therapy is often unsuccessful. Keto-

378 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-28. A, Mycetoma foot
in a dog. (Courtesy D. Chester.) B,
Mycetoma due to Torula sp. in a cat.
Note multiple black tissue grains associated with draining tracts over the
hip. (Courtesy K. Thoday.)

FIGURE 5-29. Mycetoma due to
Torula sp. in a cat. Glass slide with
wad of hair aud crust to the right,
and pus containing black tissue
grains to the left. (Courtesy K. Thoday.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 379

FIGURE 5-30. Mycetoma in a dog. Note numerous tissue grains within a pyogranuloma.

conazole and itraconazole have enjoyed erratic success.v 164 Treatment must be continued
for 2 to 3 months past clinical cure.

Phaeohyphomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Phaeohyphomycosis (chromomycosis) is caused by a number of ubiquitous saprophytic
fungi found in various soils and organic materials.1, 170 Infection occurs via wound contamination. These fungi have the characteristic of forming pigmented (dematiaceous) hyphal
elements (but not grains) in tissues.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Dog

Phaeohyphomycosis appears to be rare in dogs. Fungi isolated include Bipolaris spiciferum
(Brachycladium spiciferum, Drechslera spiciferum), Phialemonium obovatum, Pseudomicrodochium suttonii, and Xylohypha bantiana (Cladosporium trichoides, C. bantianum).lO, 167, 170, 173, 174 Solitary subcutaneous nodules, often ulcerated, may occur occasionally, especially on extremities, However, widespread nodular or necrotizing and ulcerative
lesions are also possible (see Fig. 5-16D).173, 183 Contiguous skeletal or disseminated
infections have been reported.F" 174. 183
Cat
Phaeohyphomycosis is uncommon in cats. Fungi isolated include Bipolaris spiciferum
(Brachycladium spiciferum, D. spiciferum), X. bantiana (C. trichoides, C. bantianum), X.
emmonsii, Exophiala jeanselmei (Phialophora gougerotii), Exophiala spinifera, Moniliella
suaveolens, Phialophora verrucosa, Alternaria alternata, Cladophialiophora sp., Dissitimurus exudrus, Scolecobasidium humicola, and Stemphylium spp.l68-172, 175-182 In most cases,
lesions are solitary and affect the paw, leg, head (especially the nose, cheek, and pinna),
or trunk (see Fig. 5-16C). Slow-growing, firm to fluctuant, dermal to subcutaneous

380 • Fungal Skin Diseases
nodules are visible. The lesions may be blue-gray, perhaps owing to the pigmented nature
of the fungi. Ulceration and draining tracts may occur. Disseminated infection is rare.l"?

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas, sterile granulomas, foreign-body
granulomas, and neoplasms. In dogs with widespread mucocutaneous and footpad lesions.F' the differential diagnosis includes immunologic diseases (pemphigus vulgaris,
bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, systemic lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme), drug eruptions, necrolytic migratory erythema, thallium poisoning,
epitheliotropic lymphoma, and other unusual infections (leishmaniasis, protothecosis, candidiasis).
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals granulomatous to pyogranulomatous inflammation. Pigmented fungal hyphae may be visible (Fig. 5-31). Biopsy
findings include nodular to diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermatitis and
panniculitis (Fig. 5-32). Numerous fungal elements are present as broad (2 to 6 J.Lm in
diameter), often irregular, pigmented, septate, branched or unbranched hyphae with occasional chlamydoconidia and numerous round to oval, pigmented yeast forms (Medlar
bodies, so-called copper pennies) (see Fig. 5-16E).3 Although P. curvatum is a dematiaceous fungus," it was not visible in H & E-stained biopsy specimens from a dog with
pyogranulomatous panniculitis.t'" The fungi grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25° to
35°C, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical excision of solitary lesions may be curative, but recurrence at the same site
or at new sites is common.l?" 172,175,177 Chemotherapy may be curative, depending on the
agent, but the response is unpredictable. This may be due to differing susceptibilities of

FIGURE 5-31. Direct smear from a cat with phaeohyphomycosis. Pigmented fungal hypha within a
macrophage.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 381

FIGURE 5-32. Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Nodular pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis containing numerous pigmented fungal
elements.

the fungi involved, and differences in the therapeutic protocols that have been used to
date. Drugs should be chosen on the basis of in vitro susceptibility testing. The preferred
treatment would be surgical excision followed by chemotherapy.F" Ketoconazole has been
used successfully and unsuccessfully, alone or in combination with flucytosine.168-170. l7.5, 180
Flucytosine has been used successfully and unsuccessfully, alone or in combination with
ketoconazole or amphotericin B.I7o, 172, 176, 180 Amphotericin B has been used successfully
or unsuccessfully, alone or in combination with flucytosine.F" 172, 176 One cat was successfully treated with itraconazole (given for 6 weeks beyond clinical cure), but relapsed 2
months later. 167a In humans, itraconazole, cryosurgery, and local application of heat have
also been curative in some cases."

Pythiosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Pythium spp. are aquatic organisms that rely on aquatic plant or organic substance for
their normal life cycle.1, 2, 188, 191 They are not true fungi. The motile zoospore stage shows
chemotaxis toward damaged plant or animal tissues. Once in the vicinity of their host, the
zoospores become sluggish, lose their flagella, and become encysted on the tissue. The
organisms then develop germ tubes in the direction of the affected tissues that allow for
penetration and invasion. Animals become infected by standing in or drinking stagnant
water, and damaged skin appears to be a prerequisite for infection. Environmental conditions are probably the most influential factors governing the occurrence of pythiosis. Thus,
most cases occur during the summer and fall in tropical and subtropical areas of the world
(especially Australia, India, Thailand, and Costa Rica). In North America, cases are reported from the southern United States exclusively, particularly from the Gulf Coast
region.
Pythium insidiosum (P. gracile, Hyphomyces destruens) is the species isolated from
dogs, cats, humans, and horses. 185, 188, 191 Pythiosis has been reported under other names in
the literature: phycomycosis, hyphomycosis, and oomycosis.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Large-breed, male, young dogs are most commonly affected (hunting and outdoor dogs
are at risk).l8.5a, 188, 191 German shepherds appear to be particularly susceptible.P" 188, 191

382 • Fungal Skin Diseases
Lesions may be solitary or multiple, and they are typically confined to one area of the
body, especially the legs (see Fig. 5-16F), face, and tail head (see Fig. 5-16G). Ulcerated
nodules develop, often rapidly, into large, firm to boggy masses with ulceration and
draining tracts. The discharge is usually a mixture of pus and blood. The lesions are often
extremely pruritic, and self-mutilation can be severe. Early lesions on the limbs may
resemble acral lick dermatitis. Some leg lesions progress to involve the entire circumference of the limb. Rarely, dogs experience locally invasive (skeletal) or disseminated infection.188, 191
Cat

Pythiosis is rare in cats.'?' Some cats have typical nodules with ulceration and draining
tracts on the limbs (Fig. 5-33) and ventral abdominal areas. Other cats have large
subcutaneous masses on the distal limb with no involvement of the overlying integument.
DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas, acral
lick dermatitis, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals
granulomatous to pyogranulomatous inflammation wherein eosinophils are often numerous; however, fungal elements occur only occasionally. Biopsy findings include nodular to
diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with numerous
eosinophils. Inflammation is centered on foci of necrosis and amorphous eosinophilic
material. Hyphae are difficult to see in H & E-stained sections and often appear as clear
spaces (hyphal "ghosts") (Fig. 5-34) or slightly basophilic granular material.
Hyphae are 4 to 6 p.m in diameter, occasionally septate, irregularly branching, with
nonparallel sides (Fig. 5-35). Fungal elements are most common and are most numerous
within foci of necrosis. Hyphae are often surrounded by eosinophilic "sleeves" of the
Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon. Fungal elements stain very well with Gomori methenamine silver (GMS) but not with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). Hyphae occasionally invade
blood vessels (especially arteries), whereupon thrombosed vessels may be prominent.
Pythium spp. grow rapidly at 25° to 37°C on blood agar and Sabouraud's dextrose agar,
and wedge biopsies are the preferred material for culture. Special water culture techniques that induce diagnostic zoospore formation are time-consuming and somewhat unreliable. 185. 188, 191 It is advisable to submit specimens to veterinary diagnostic laboratories,
where the microbiologist is more likely to be familiar with Pythium spp. Pythium antigen
can be demonstrated in sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues by an indi-

FIGURE 5-33. Feline pythiosis.
Ulcerated nodule with draining tracts
over the hock. (Courtesy C. Foil.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 383

FIGURE 5-34. Pythiosis. Hyphae are unstained
"ghosts" in H & E stained specimens. (From Triscott
JA, Weedon D, Cabana E: Human subcutaneous pythiosis. J Cutan Pathol 20:267, 1993. © 1993 Munksgaard International Publishers Ltd., Copenhagen,
Denmark.)

FIGURE 5-35. Canine pythiosis. Numerous hyphae in a pyogranulomatous dermatitis. (Courtesy
C. Foil.)

384 • Fungal Skin Diseases
rect immunoperoxidase technique. 191 An agar gel immunodiffusion test used to detect
precipitating antibodies in serum was negative in infected dogS. 19 1 A recently developed
ELISA test, which appears to be sensitive and specific, may prove to be a useful serodiagnostic test in the future.'?'

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of choice, but recurrence is not uncommon. 188, 191
Amputation of an affected limb may be necessary. The arteries in the proximal end of an
amputated limb, as well as the regional lymph node, should be examined for evidence of
metastasis. Because Pythium spp. do not share cell wall characteristics with true fungi,
antifungal chemotherapy agents (amphotericin B, ketoconazole, flucytosine) have been
disappointing in the treatment of this disease. 188, 191 Autogenous Pythium spp. vaccines and
transfer factor have been tried without success.P" 188, 191 Metalaxyl, a fungicide used to kill
oomycetes pathogenic to plants, was used topically in a few dogs without success. 191
Treated dogs experienced significant gastrointestinal side effects (nausea, vomiting, anorexia).

Zygomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Zygomycetes are ubiquitous saprophytes of soil and decaying vegetation and a component
of the normal flora of skin and haircoat.l'< 189. 190 The portal of entry may be gastrointestinal, respiratory, or cutaneous via wound contamination. In humans, a compromised immune system is generally necessary for invasion to occur. However, in dogs and cats, such
factors have not been identified in most instances.
There are two orders of Zygomycetes that cause disease: (1) Mucorales, which includes the genera Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia, and Mortierella and (2) Entomophthorales,
which includes the genera Conidiobolus and Basidiobolus. Infections caused by fungi from
the order Mucorales were previously called mucormycosis and those associated with the
order Entomophthorales were called entomophthoromycosis. In addition, many of the
older reports of phycomycosis in dogs and cats were likely zygomycosis.189

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Zygomycosis appears to be rare in dogs and cats, and most infected animals have had fatal
gastrointestinal disease.l'" Skin lesions may be solitary or multiple; are usually nodular,
ulcerated, and draining; and often involve the extremities (Fig. 5-36).13. 189, 190 One dog
had a rapidly enlarging raised, ulcerated lesion in the hard palate.l'" Another dog had a
nonhealing bite wound in the neck caused by Absidia corymbifera. 186

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation with numerous eosinophils, wherein fungal elements may be visualized. Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to
granulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis containing numerous eosinophils. Inflammation
is centered on amorphous eosinophil material that occasionally contains either clear spaces
representing poorly stained hyphae (hyphal "ghosts") or slightly basophilic granular material representing hyphal protoplasm.
Vascular invasion and hematogenous spread is more common in mucormycosis than in
entomophthoromycosis (Fig. 5-37). Hyphae are broad (6 to 25 p.,m in diameter), occasionally septate, and irregularly branching, with nonparallel sides." 184, 190 Hyphae are often
surrounded by eosinophilic "sleeves" of the Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon. Fungal elements are most commonly found and are most abundant within foci of necrosis. Fungal

Fungal Skin Diseases • 385

FIGURE 5-36. Zygomycosis in a
dog. Ulcerated nodules on leg.
(Courtesy T. Manning.)

elements stain well with GMS but variably with PAS. Zygomycetes grows on Sabouraud's
dextrose agar at 25°C, and punch or wedge biopsies are the preferred material for culture.
Biopsy specimens submitted for culture should not be ground or macerated because this
may destroy the organism. Cycloheximide may inhibit fungal growth.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The susceptibility of the Zygomycetes to antimycotic agents is variable and largely unknown.v 184. 189 Solitary lesions may be surgically excised. In other cases, surgical excision
or debulking may be followed by chemotherapy as dictated by in vitro susceptibility tests
(amphotericin B, azoles, potassium iodide)." 184, 189 One dog was cured with 2 months of

FIGURE 5-37. Zygomycosis in a
dog. Fungal elements invading wall
and occluding lumen of subcutaneous
artery. (Courtesy T. Manning.)

386 • Fungal Skin Diseases

itraconazole (10 mglkg q12h),I84 whereas itraconazole (4 mglkg q12h) produced no response in another dog. 190

Sporotrichosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Sporotrichosis is caused by the ubiquitous dimorphic fungus Sporothrix schenckii, which
exists as a saprophyte in soil and organic debris. 1, 195, 196 Infection results from wound
contamination. Glucocorticoids and other immunosuppressive drugs are contraindicated in
dogs or cats with sporotrichosis. 193, 195, 196 These drugs should be avoided both during and
after treatment of the disease because immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids have
been reported to cause a recurrence of clinical sporotrichosis as long as 4 to 6 months
after apparent clinical cure.!"
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Sporotrichosis is uncommon to rare. The disease is often related to puncture wounds from
thorns or wood splinters. 195, 196 This is presumably why the disease is more common
in hunting dogs. 195 The cutaneous form of sporotrichosis is the most commonly reported. 195, 196 Multiple firm nodules, ulcerated plaques with raised borders or annular
crusted and alopecic areas are present, especially on the head, pinnae, and trunk (see
Figs. 5-16H and 5-38A). Some lesions have a verrucous appearance. Nodules may
ulcerate or develop draining tracts (see Fig. 5-38B).
Lesions are neither painful nor pruritic, and affected dogs are usually healthy otherwise. The cutaneolymphatic form is characterized by a nodule on the distal aspect of one
limb, with subsequent ascending infection via the lymphatics. 195, 196 Secondary nodules
may be firm or fluctuant; they often ulcerate and discharge a brownish red exudate, and
they are associated with regional lymphadenopathy. Affected dogs are usually otherwise
healthy. Ulcers and nodules affecting the nares, mucocutaneous junctions, and scrotum
may be seen, as well as papulonodular otitis externa." Disseminated sporotrichosis is
extremely rare. 195 • 196

Cat
Sporotrichosis is uncommon. The disease is believed to be acquired by inoculation of the
organism by contaminated claws or teeth from another cat. 195, 196 This may explain why
the disease is usually seen in intact male cats that roam outdoors.P" 196 Lesions are
common on the head (see Fig. 5-38C), distal limbs, or tail base region. 195 , 196 The cats
may initially present with fight wound abscesses, draining tracts, or cellulitis. Affected
areas ulcerate, drain a purulent exudate, and form crusted nodules. Large areas of necrosis may develop, with exposure of muscle and bone. The disease may be spread to other
areas of the body (other limbs, face, pinnae) via autoinoculation during normal grooming
behavior. Some cats may present with a history of lethargy, depression, anorexia, and
fever, which suggest the potential for disseminated disease.P': 196 Although affected cats
frequently appear clinically to have only dermatologic disease, most have necropsy evidence of lymph node and lymphatic vessel involvement, and S. schenckii is commonly
isolated in culture from numerous internal organs and feces. 195 , 196
Zoonotic Aspects

The zoonotic potential of sporotrichosis, especially in cats, must be seriously considered
and respected.s- 192, 194-196 Several reports have documented transmission of sporotrichosis
to humans through contact with an ulcerated wound or the exudate from an infected
cat, 85, 192, 194-196 Human infections have occurred even though there had been no known
injury or penetrating wound prior to the onset of the disease.l'" Transmission from
animals to humans has been limited to feline sporotrichosis, presumably because

FIGURE 5-38. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Sporotrichosis. Close-up of the top of the head of a dog.
Multiple crusted plaques. B, Sporotrichosis presenting as multiple papules and nodules on the bridge of the nose
of a collie. C, Sporotrichosis presenting as multiple ulcers on the face of a cat. D, Multiple erythematous
papules and a large, ulcerated nodule on the hand of a human with sporotrichosis. (Courtesy R. Goltz.) E, Large
nodule with a central ulcer on the hind paw of a cat caused by Alternaria sp. F, Ulcerated nodules on the nose
of a dog with blastomycosis. (Courtesy J. Brace.) G, Swollen digit with a focal ulceration in a dog with
blastomycosis. H, Alopecic, erythematous nodule on the digit of a dog with coccidioidomycosis. (Courtesy D.
Chester.)

388 • Fungal Skin Diseases
large numbers of organisms are found in contaminated feline tissues, exudates, and
feces. 192, 195, 196 Veterinarians, veterinary technicians, veterinary students, and owners of
infected cats have a higher risk of infection. 8,s. 192, 194, 196
The most common form of sporotrichosis in humans is cutaneolymphatic.f- 85, 195 A
primary lesion-which may be a papule, pustule, nodule, abscess, or verrucous growthdevelops at the site of injury. This lesion may be painful. Most lesions are on an extremity
(finger, hand, foot) (see Fig. 5-38D) or the face. Secondary lesions then ascend proximally via lymphatic vessels. The cutaneous (fixed) form is less common.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas,
and neoplasms. Sporotrichosis should always be suspected in cats with nonhealing, fightwound abscesses. Because of the zoonotic potential of sporotrichosis, precautions must be
taken. All people handling cats suspected of having sporotrichosis should wear gloves.
Gloves should also be worn when samples are taken of exudates or tissues. The gloves
should then be carefully removed and disposed of. Forearms, wrists, and hands should be
washed in chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation. The organism is difficult to find in the exudates
of dogs but is easily found in those of cats (Fig. 5-39). S. schenckii is a pleomorphic yeast
that is round, oval, or cigar-shaped, 2 to 10 JLm in length. Biopsy findings include nodular
to diffuse, suppurative to granulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis (Fig. 5-40). Fungal
elements are numerous and readily found in cats but rarely in dogs (Fig. 5-41). The
fungi have a refractile cell wall from which the cytoplasm may shrink, giving the impression that the organism has a capsule. When this occurs, the organisms may be confused
with Cryptococcus neofornwns. S. schenckii grows on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 30°C;
samples submitted for culture should include both a sample of the exudate (from deep
within a draining tract) and a piece of tissue (removed surgically) for a macerated tissue
culture. A fluorescent antibody test is most useful in dogs because it may be positive
when cultures are negative. 13 • 195

FIGURE 5-39. Feline sporotrichosis. Numerous yeast and cigar bodies in a macrophage. (Courtesy J.M. MacDonald.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 389

FIGURE 5-40. Feline sporotrichosis. Pyogranulomatous dermatitis with intracellular yeast and
cigar bodies (arrow).

FIGURE 5-41. Canine sporotrichosis. Numerous yeast and cigar bodies (GMS stain).

390 • Fungal Skin Diseases
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Dog

The treatment of choice is oral administration of a supersaturated solution of potassium
iodide, 40 mglkg q8h to q12h with food," 13. 195. 196 Treatment must be continued for 30
days beyond clinical cure (4 to 8 weeks). Signs of toxicity (iodism) include ocular and
nasal discharge, a dry haircoat with excessively scaling skin, vomiting, depression, and
collapse.Pv 196 If iodism is observed, medication should be stopped for 1 week. The drug
may then be re-instituted at the same or a lower dosage. If iodism becomes a recurrent
problem or if side effects are severe, alternative treatment should be considered.
The imidazole and triazole classes of drugs may be considered for dogs that do not
tolerate iodides, are refractory to them, or experience relapse after apparent clinical
cure.v 195. 196 Ketoconazole or itraconazole may be used successfully and are continued for
30 days beyond clinical cure. Side effects are usually mild.
Cat

Increased sensitivity to the toxic side effects of iodides and ketoconazole in cats poses a
greater challenge for the treatment of sporotrichosis. A supersaturated solution of potassium iodide may be administered orally at 20 mglkg q12h to q24h with foodv 192. 195, 196 for
30 days beyond clinical cure (4 to 8 weeks). Signs of iodism include vomiting, anorexia,
depression, twitching, hypothermia, and cardiovascular failure. In animals that cannot
tolerate or fail to respond to iodides, ketoconazole or itraconazole should be used'- 195, 196

Rhinosporidiosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Rhinosporidium seeberi is a fungal organism of uncertain classification. I. 197 Attempts to
culture it using conventional fungal culture media were unsuccessful; however, the organism has been grown in tissue culture.P? The disease is endemic in India and Argentina,
but North American reports have come almost exclusively from the southern United
States. It is thought that infection is acquired by mucosal contact with stagnant water or
dust and that trauma is a predisposing factor.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
The disease appears to be rare, and it is reported only in dogs'!' 197 There appears to be a
predilection for large-breed, male dogs. Affected dogs typically present for wheezing,
sneezing, unilateral seropurulent nasal discharge, and epistaxis. Nasal polyps may be
visible in the nares or may be visualized by rhinoscopy. Single or multiple polyps varying
in size from a few millimeters up to 3 cm are pink, red, or grayish and are covered with
numerous pinpoint, white foci (fungal sporangia). Polyps may be sessile or pedunculated,
and they may protrude out of, or involve, the mucocutaneous area of the nostril.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of nasal exudate or histologic examination of the polyp should be
diagnostic. Biopsy findings include a fibrovascular polyp containing numerous sporangia
(spherules) having a thick, double outer membrane. The sporangia vary from 100 to 400
/Lm in diameter and contain a variable number of sporangiospores (endospores).': 197 A
variable number of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils are often found where
sporangiospores (2 to 10 /Lm in diameter) have been released into the surrounding
connective tissue.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 391

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice, although recurrence 6 to 12 months after
surgery has been reported.P? Successes have been reported with dapsone or ketoconazole
administered orally; however, the utility of medical therapy in canine rhinosporidiosis
requires further evaluation.

Alternaria Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Alternaria spp. are ubiquitous saprophytic fungi in soil and organic debris and a common
component of the flora of the canine and feline Integument.sv 13 They cause opportunistic
wound infections.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Alternaria spp. are rarely reported to cause skin disease in dogs and cats. In the dog,
dermatologic abnormalities attributed to Alternaria spp. infection include (1) poorly circumscribed areas of alopecia, erythema, and scaling, especially in intertriginous or traumatized areas of skin,198, 230 and (2) nodular, ulcerated, depigmented inflammation of the
nose (Alternaria tenuissima) .199 In the cat, Alternaria spp. have been associated with
phaeohyphomycosis (Alternaria alternatay'" and ulcerated nodules on the paw (see Fig.
5-38E).

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for superficial inflammatory disease includes staphylococcal folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and Malassezia dermatitis. The differential diagnosis for nodules includes infectious and foreign-body granulomas and neoplasms. Cytologic
examination of aspirates or direct smears from nodular lesions reveals pyogranulomatous
inflammation and numerous fungal elements. Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse
pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with numerous broad (3 to 6 /Lm in diameter), septate, branched or unbranched hyphae (Fig. 5-42). Alternaria spp. grow on
Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Punch biopsies are the preferred culture material.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Surgical excision of nodules may be curative. Antifungal chemotherapy should be based on
in vitro susceptibility tests. One dog was cured after 8 weeks of oral ketoconazcle.l'"

• SYSTEMIC MYCOSES
Deep mycoses are fungal infections of internal organs that may secondarily disseminate by
hematogenous spread to the skin. Fungi that cause deep mycoses exist as saprophytes in
soil or vegetation. These infections are usually not contagious because the animal inhales
conidia from a specific ecologic niche. Skin lesions that occur via primary cutaneous
inoculation are very rare, and animals with skin lesions are assumed to have systemic
infection until proven otherwise. The deep mycoses are discussed only briefly here. The
reader is referred to texts on mycology and infectious diseases for additional information.

Blastomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic saprophytic fungus.l. 2. 9,10,14,223 Four elementsmoisture, soil type (sandy, acid), presence of wildlife, and soil disruption-make up

392 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-42. Alternaria dermatitis in a cat. A, Pyogranulomatous
panniculitis containing numerous
fungal hyphae (arrow). B, Close-up
of A stained with GMS. Fungal hyphae are more obvious.

the "microfocus model" that helps explain where B. dermatitidis is most likely to be
found.219.220 Even within endemic areas, the fungus does not seem to be widely distributed. Rarely has the organism been successfully isolated from the environment. Most
people and dogs living in such areas show no serologic or skin test evidence of exposure.
A point source where the exposure occurs within an enzootic area is more likely. Blastomycosis (Gilchrist's disease, Chicago disease) is principally a disease of North America, but
it has been identified in Africa and Central America. In North America, the endemic
distribution of blastomycosis is well-defined and includes the Mississippi, Missouri, New
York, Ohio, and St. Lawrence River Valleys and the Mid-Atlantic states.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Blastomycosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas. Young (2 to 4 years old) male
dogs of large breeds and sporting breeds (especially Doberman pinscher, Labrador retriever, Bluetick coonhound, Treeing Walker coonhound, pointers, Weimaraners) are predisposed.P" 223. 22.5 A larger number of cases occur in the fall.219 • 22.5 Proximity to a body of
water was a Significant risk factor for affected dogs.219 Clinical signs usually include
anorexia, weight loss, coughing, dyspnea, ocular disease, lameness, and skin disease.219.223
Up to 40% of dogs with blastomycosis have skin lesions that include firm papules,

Fungal Skin Diseases • 393

nodules, and plaques, ulcers, draining tracts, and subcutaneous abscesses.P" Lesions are
usually multiple and may be found anywhere; however, the nasal planum (see Fig.
5-38F), face, and clawbeds (see Fig. 5-38G) appear to be preferred sites. Calcinosis cutis
developed in 3 dogs with systemic blastomycosis after treatment with amphotericin B had
been instituted.P!"
Cat
Blastomycosis is very rare in cats. Dyspnea, draining skin lesions (especially the digits) (see
Fig. 5-5IA), and weight loss are the most prominent clinical signS.8. 223 Siamese cats may
be predisposed.

DIAGNOSIS
A history of travel to an endemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears is often diagnostic, revealing suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation containing round to oval yeastlike fungi (5 to 20 /-Lm in diameter) that show broad-based budding and have a thick,
refractile, double-contoured cell wall (Fig. 5-43). Biopsy findings include nodular to
diffuse, suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis wherein the fungus
is usually found easily (Fig. 5-44). Culture of cytologic specimens is not recommended
for in-hospital laboratories because of the danger of infection from the mycelial form of
the organisms. Only after the organisms have been searched for extensively should
serologic testing (agar-gel immunodiffusion, ELISA) be used to help establish a diagnosis. 2 19, 22,3

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
All animals with clinical blastomycosis should be treated because spontaneous remission is
rare.l'v 219, 223 Although either amphotericin B (83% response rate) or ketoconazole (62%
rate) may be effective alone, the sequential administration of these two antifungal agents
is preferred.l- 219, 223 In dogs, itraconazole is the drug of choice. 2 19, 224 It is more effective
than ketoconazole, as effective as amphotericin B, is easily administered at home, has few
side effects, and is equal cost-wise to amphotericin B. A dosage of 5 mglkg q24h has the
same success rate and fewer side effects than 10 mg/kg q24h. 224 The administration of an
amphotericin B lipid complex appears to produce comparable therapeutic results while
reducing the toxicities inherent to traditional amphotericin B treatment protocols.P''

FIGURE 5-43. Direct smear
from a dog with blastomycosis. Oval
yeasts demonstrate broad-based budding (arrow). (Courtesy T. French.)

394 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-44. Canine blastomycosis. Large, round, thick-walled yeast bodies (H & E stain).

PUBLIC HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
Dogs appear to have a tenfold increased risk for blastomycosis compared with humans
and can serve as sentinels for blastomycosis in humans.P? Penetrating wounds contaminated by the organisms have produced infections in humans.P': 223 Care should be taken
to avoid getting bitten when handling infected animals. Accidental inoculation of organisms by contaminated knives or needles should be avoided at necropsy or during fineneedle aspiration. Culturing of the organism should be limited to laboratories with proper
facilities.P'

Coccidioidomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Coccidioides immitis is a dimorphic saprophytic soil fungus. I. 2, 9, 10. 14, 226 The ecologic
niche of this fungus is characterized by sandy, alkaline soils, high environmental temperature, low rainfall, and low elevation, Geographically, this area is called the Lower Sonoran
Life Zone and includes the southwestern United States, Mexico, and Central and South
America, Serologic surveys indicate that most human and canine inhabitants of the endemic area become infected, Coccidioidomycosis has also been called San Joaquin Valley
Fever.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Coccidioidomycosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas ,14. 226 Young (1 to 4 years
old) male dogs are predisposed, and the Boxer and Doberman pinscher are predisposed to
disseminated infections, Clinical signs usually include coughing, dyspnea, persistent or
fluctuating fever, anorexia, weight loss, lameness, skin disease, and ocular disease.v'- 226
Skin lesions are usually multiple and include papules, nodules, abscesses, draining tracts,
and ulcers, Skin lesions almost always occur over sites of infected bone (especially the
distal diaphyseal, metaphyseal, and epiphyseal areas of long bones) (see Fig. 5-38H).

Fungal Skin Diseases • 395

Cat
Coccidioidomycosis is rare in cats.lv 226, 227 Clinical signs include anorexia, weight loss,
cough, dyspnea, lameness, ocular disease, and skin lesions. In one study, over one half of
affected cats had dermatologic signs, especially draining tracts, subcutaneous granulomas,
and abscesses.P?

DIAGNOSIS
A history of travel to an endemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation. Fungal elements are seldom found (Fig. 5-45B).226
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis. Fungal elements are usually present but may be sparse.
The organisms are present in spherule (20 to 200 /Lm in diameter) and endospore (2 to 5
/Lm in diameter) forms (see Fig. 5-45A).1,2· 9. 226
Attempts should not be made to culture C. immitis in veterinary practices because of
the risk of human infection.P" Culturing of the organism should be limited to laboratories
with appropriate facilities. Serologic tests (precipitin, complement fixation) are useful for
diagnosis. 226

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
All animals with clinical coccidioidomycosis should be treated because spontaneous remission is unlikely.226 The current drug of choice is ketoconazole.l"- 226, 227 Treatment of
animals with disseminated disease should continue for a minimum of 1 year. Amphotericin
B is used to treat animals that cannot tolerate or do not respond to ketoconazole.l" 226

Cryptococcosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Cryptococcus neoformans is a ubiquitous, saprophytic, yeastlike fungus that is most
frequently associated with droppings and the accumulated filth and debris of pigeon
roosts." 10.211 In one study, however, 42% of affected cats lived indoors, their source of
infection being undetermined.P" Males appear to be over-represented (roaming behavior?),202 and Abyssinians and Siamese may be at risk.200 Currently there are four serotypes
(A, B, C, D) and two varieties of C. neoformans: C. neoformans v. neoformans (serotype A
and D), and C. neoformans v. gattii (serotypes Band C).206, 214 C. neoformans v. neoformans is most prevalent in the United States and Europe, whereas C. neoformans v. gattii
is prevalent in Australia, Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America. In humans, C.
neoformans v. gattii infects immunocompetent persons and may be more difficult to
treat,214
The establishment and spread of infection are highly dependent on host immunity;
however, underlying diseases are often not detected in dogs and cats with cryptococcosis.1 4, 211. 217 Both experimental and natural cases of cryptococcosis in dogs and cats are
accelerated or worsened by glucocorticoid therapy."! In the cat, cryptococcal infection has
often been associated with FeLV or FIV infections." 204. 211 Cryptococcosis has also been
called European blastomycosis and torulosis.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Cryptococcosis is a rare disease.v- 207, 211 Young (average age 3 years) large-breed dogs are
predisposed. Clinical signs include various abnormalities of the central nervous system and
eyes. 14. 211 Skin lesions are found in about 20% of cases; these lesions are characterized by
papules, nodules, ulcers (Fig. 5-46A), abscesses, and draining tracts. The nose, lips, and
clawbeds are often affected. 11. 211

396 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-45. A, Canine coccidioidomycosis. Coccidioides immitis spherule in center of pyogranuloma (PAS stain). B, Direct smear from a dog with coccidioidomycosis. Ruptured spherule
releasing endospores and surrounded by degenerate neutrophils. (Courtesy T. French.)

Fungal Skin Diseases • 397

FIGURE 5-46. Miscellaneous fungal infections. A, Necrosis and ulceration in a dog with cryptococcosis. B,
Granulomatous nasal dermatitis in a cat with cryptococcosis, C, Ulcerated nodule containing gelatinous exudate on the
back of a cat with cryptococcosis. D, Multifocal areas of depigmentation and ulceration of the nostrils in a dog with
nasal aspergillosis. E, Ulcers on the leg of a dog with aspergillosis. (Courtesy R. Halliwell.) F, Chronic blepharitis with
sticky, black exudate in a Chow Chow caused by Aspergillus niger. G, Swollen, erythematous ulcerated nose of a dog
with protothecosis. (Courtesy J. Perrier.) H, Swollen, ulcerated footpads of a dog with protothecosis. (Courtesy J.
Perrier.)

398 • Fungal Skin Diseases
Cat

Cryptococcosis is an uncommon disease, but it is the most common deep mycosis of the
cat." 14, 200, 202, 204, 211 Clinical signs occur from abnormalities of the upper respiratory,
cutaneous, central nervous, and ocular systems." 14,200,202,211 In about 70% of cases with
upper respiratory signs, a flesh-colored, polyp-like mass is visible in the nostril, or a firm
to mushy subcutaneous swelling over the bridge of the nose is evident (see Fig, 5-46B).
The skin or subcutaneous tissues are involved in about 40% of cases.v 14, 200, 201, 211 Lesions
are usually multiple and include papules, nodules (see Fig. 5-46C), abscesses, ulcers, and
draining tracts." 20B, 21l. 216, 217 Skin lesions can occur anywhere but most commonly involve
the face, pinnae, and paws.
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation with numerous pleomorphic (round to elliptical, 2 to 20 /Lm in
diameter) yeastlike organisms. These show narrow-based budding and are surrounded by a
mucinous capsule of variable thickness, which forms a clear or refractile halo (Fig.
5-47).1-3, 9. 10, 211 Biopsy findings include a cystic degeneration or vacuolation of the
dermis and subcutis that is surprisingly acellular (sometimes likened to an infusion of soap
bubbles) (Figs. 5-48, 5-49) or a nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to granulomatous
dermatitis and panniculitis (Fig. 5-50) containing numerous organisms. Mayer's mucicarmine is a useful special stain because it stains the organism's capsule (carminophilic)
red." 211 The only clinically useful serologic test is a latex agglutination test that detects
cryptococcal capsular antigen. 209, 21l It may, however, yield negative results in cats with
disease apparently isolated to the skin.209, 211, 217 The test may also be used to monitor
response to therapy.209, 211, 215, 217 However, serum titers to cryptococcal antigens in cats
can persist, with or without clinical signs, for months to years after initial diagnosis and
treatment,201,204

FIGURE 5-47. Canine cryptococcosis. Encapsulated yeast bodies in direct smear (NMB stain).

Fungal Skin Diseases • 399

FIGURE 5-48. Canine cryptococcosis. Dermis and subcutis have a
cystic or bubbly appearance. Numerous fungal organisms and very few
inflammatory cells are seen on
higher power (see Fig. 5-49).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The drugs of choice are ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole." Itraconazole was
successful in cats in which ketoconazole had produced no response.w- 212 Treatment
outcome was not influenced by gender, location of infection, or magnitude of pretreatment serum antigen titer. 204 However, cats seropositive for FeLV or FIV had a higher
"See references 201, 203, 205, 208, 210-212, 215, 216.

FIGURE 5-49. Feline cryptococcosis. Numerous encapsulated yeast bodies on a cystic background
(mucicarmine stain).

400 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-50. Feline cryptococcosis. Numerous encapsulated yeast bodies in pyogranuloma
(H & E stain).

likelihood of treatment failure. 204 The combination of ketoconazole and flucytosine, with
lower doses of both, may produce more rapid cures and a reduction in side effects.213.217
Amphotericin B, flucytosine, and the combination of both drugs have also been successfully used to treat cryptococcosis." 14.211.218 Rarely, solitary lesions in animals with primary
cutaneous cryptococcosis can be surgically excised and the animals cured.208.211 A preliminary report indicated that the subcutaneous administration of amphotericin B was effective and associated with less azotemia than traditional amphotericin B protocols.P"

Histoplasmosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic saprophytic soil fungus.l, 2, 9.10.14.229 The organism
prefers areas with moist, humid conditions and soil containing nitrogen-rich organic matter such as bird and bat excrement. Most cases of histoplasmosis occur in the central
United States in the Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi River Valleys. Surveys indicate that
most human and canine inhabitants of endemic areas become infected.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

«4

Histoplasmosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas.lv 229 Young dogs
years old)
are usually affected, and Pointers, Weimaraners, and Brittany spaniels may be predis-

Fungal Skin Diseases • 40 I

posed. 14, 229 Clinical signs include anorexia, weight loss, fever that is unresponsive to
antibiotic therapy, coughing, dyspnea, gastrointestinal disease, ocular disease, and skin
disease. 14, 229 Skin lesions are usually multiple, occur anywhere on the body, and are
characterized by papules, nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts.
Cat

Histoplasmosis is an uncommon disease in endemic areas. 14, 228, 229 Most affected cats are
younger than 4 years old, and most have disseminated disease. Clinical signs include
depression, weight loss, fever, anorexia, dyspnea, ocular disease, and skin disease. 14, 228, 229
Skin lesions are usually multiple, occur anywhere on the body (especially the face, nose,
and pinnae), and are characterized by papules, nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts (Fig.
5-5IB).
DIAGNOSIS
A history of travel to an endemic area should increase the clinician's index of suspicion.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation containing numerous small (2 to 4 /Lm in diameter), round yeast
bodies with a basophilic center and lighter halo caused by shrinkage of the yeast during
staining (Fig. 5-52).1, 2, 9, 10, 229 Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranuloma-

FIGURE 5-5 I. A, Feline blastomycosis. Nonhealing ulcer over lateral
thorax. B, Feline histoplasmosis. Nodule on lateral surface of pinnae. (Courtesy J. MacDonald.)

402 • Fungal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 5-52. Direct smear
from a dog with histoplasmosis. Multiple small, intracytoplasmic yeasts in
a macrophage. (Courtesy T. French.)

tous to granulomatous dermatitis with numerous intracellular organisms (Fig. 5-53). At
present, no reliable serologic test exists.14, 229 Attempts to culture H. capsulatum in a
routine practice setting are not recommended because of the pathogenic potential of this
organism. 229

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
All animals with clinical histoplasmosis should be treated because spontaneous remission is
unlikely.229 The current drug of choice is ketoconazole.l- 229 For severe or fulminating

FIGURE 5-53. Canine histoplasmosis. Numerous small, intracellular yeast bodies in a granuloma
(H & E stain).

Fungal Skin Diseases • 403
cases, the combination of ketoconazole and amphotericin B is recommended.I- 229 Itraconazole and fluconazole have shown promise in early trialS.228, 229

• MISCELLANEOUS MYCOSES

Aspergillus Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Aspergillus spp. are ubiquitous fungi that exist in nature as soil and vegetation saprophytes
and as a component of normal skin, haircoat, and mucosal flora in humans and animals,13, 231 In humans, many cases of aspergillosis are associated with immunosuppression;
in dogs, however, predisposing factors are not usually identified.F" The organism is
believed to produce opportunistic infections by invading mucosal or cutaneous surfaces. A.
fumigatus is the most common species encountered in nasal aspergillosis, with A. niger, A.
nidulans, and A. Jlavus being occasionally involved.F" In disseminated aspergillosis, infection has involved, in decreasing frequency, A. terreus, A. deJlectus, A. Jlavipes, and A.
fumigatus. 23 1

CLINICAL FINDINGS
To date, cutaneous and mucocutaneous Aspergillus infections has been reported only in
dogs,13,230 Dolichocephalic and mesocephalic breeds are more susceptible to nasal aspergillosis, but there is no apparent age or sex predtlectton.F" Inflammation, depigmentation,
ulceration, and crusting of the external nares and, occasionally, the nasal planum may be
visible secondary to nasal discharge (see Fig. 5-46D). Most cases of disseminated aspergillosis have occurred in German shepherds and have been reported from Australia or
California. 13, 231 These dogs may have cutaneous nodules, abscesses, and draining tracts as
well as oral ulcers. Aspergillus spp. have rarely been associated with cutaneous nodules
and ulcers (see Fig. 5-46E) or blepharitis (see Fig. 5-46F) in otherwise healthy dogs,13

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious diseases, neoplastic diseases, and in the
case of nasal aspergillosis, various immune-mediated disorders such as discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus, and drug eruption.
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranulomatous inflammation, with fungal elements occasionally visualized. Biopsy findings include
nodular to diffuse suppurative or pyogranulomatous dermatitis or necrotizing dermatitis
with minimal inflammation. Organisms are usually plentiful and characterized by broad (3
to 6 uui in diameter) septate, dichotomously branched hyphae. Aspergillus spp. can be
grown on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C.
In nasal aspergillosis, blind culture or cytologic examination of discharge is often
unrewarding and can erroneously suggest that the disease is bacterial in origin. 231 Heavy
growths of Pseudorrwnas spp. or other Enterobacteriaceae are common. In addition,
Aspergillus or Penicillium spp. can be cultured from nasal swabs in up to 40% of normal
dogs or dogs with nasal neoplasia.P' Rhinoscopy allows fungal plaques (a white, yellow, or
light-green mold) to be visualized and sampled directly for cytologic, histopathologic, and
cultural examinations. Serologic diagnosis is possible using agar-gel immunodiffusion,
counter immunoelectrophoresis, or ELISA techniques.F"

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Thiabendazole (10 to 20 mglkg ql2h) or ketoconazole (5 to 10 mglkg q12h) administered
orally eliminates the disease in about 50% of the cases.P: 231 Fluconazole (2.5 to 5 mglkg
q12h) is reported to be more effective than itraconazole (5 mglkg q 12h), but few clinical

404 • Fungal Skin Diseases
trials have been conducted to date. 231, 255. 259 These medications must be administered for
3 to 4 weeks beyond clinical cure, so a total of 6 to 8 weeks of treatment is required. For
nasal aspergillosis, the most successful therapeutic regimen is enilconazole administered
topically for 7 to 10 days through tubes implanted in each nasal chamber via the frontal
sinuses. 231, 255, 259 To date, no form of therapy has been successful in disseminated aspergilIosis."

Paecilomycosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Paecilomyces spp. are ubiquitous saprophytic, opportunistic yeastlike fungi that exist in
nature in soil and decaying vegetation. 1, 2, 9, 10 In humans, disease occurs in immunosuppressed persons. The organism is presumed to produce opportunistic infections by invading mucosal or cutaneous surfaces. Evidence for immunosuppression has not been present
for most reported cases of paecilomycosis in dogs and cats.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

The disease appears to be extremely rare. Most dogs have had disseminated infections
with no skin lesions." 13, 235 One dog had severe, chronic, bilateral otitis extema characterized by severe hyperplasia, ulceration, pain, and a brownish-black aural discharge. 236
Another dog had an ulcerated, crusted nodule in the region of the left caudal mammary
gland. 234 Both dogs experienced disseminated disease.
Cat

The disease appears to be extremely rare. 233 One cat experienced an ulcerated, nonhealing
nodule on a paw that was caused by Paecilomyces [umosoroseusP" The cat subsequently
experienced other cutaneous, nasal, and disseminated lesions despite receiving ketoconazole orally at 10 to 40 mglkglday. Another cat had soft tissue swellings of a digit and
contiguous metacarpus and an upper lip, from which P. lilacinus was consistently isolated. 237 Surgical excision and oral itraconazole was curative.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation and
numerous pleomorphic fungal elements, including thick, branched, septate pseudohyphae
and round to oval, often unipolar, broad-based budding, yeastlike structures (2 to 15 /-Lm
in diameter) (Fig. 5_54).10,232-234,236 Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis with numerous fungal elements. Paecilomyces spp. grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C, and punch biopsy is the preferred material for culture.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Paecilomyces spp. are usually resistant to amphotericin B but may be susceptible to azole
compounds such as ketoconazole or itraconazole.P" 234 Ketoconazole was of no benefit in
one dog234 and one cat 232 with paecilomycosis. Too few cases have been treated to allow
detailed therapeutic and prognostic recommendations.

Protothecosis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Prototheca spp. are ubiquitous, saprophytic achlorophyllous algae that are found in soil,
raw and treated sewage, the slime flux of trees, animal wastes, tap water, fresh water

Fungal Skin Diseases • 405

FIGURE 5-54. Paecilomycosis. Yeast-like structure (black arrow) and pseudohyphae (white
arrows). (From Elliott GS, Whitney MS, Reed WM, Tuite JF: Antemortem diagnosis of
paecilomycosis in a cat. JAVMA 184:93, 1984.)

streams, swimming pools, and contaminated and stagnant water.F"' 24.5 In North America,
most cases are reported from the southern United States. The organism causes opportunistic infections, and disseminated disease is often associated with dysfunction of host
immunity. The portal of entry is believed to be the colon in disseminated infections and
wound contamination in cutaneous lesions. The virulence of the Prototheca organisms may
differ; only Prototheca wickerhamii is isolated from cutaneous infections in dogs and cats,
and Prototheca zopfii is nearly always isolated from disseminated infections in dogs. 245
A 1997 immunohistochemical analysis of serial skin biopsy specimens from a dog with
protothecosis, before and during treatment, revealed an inverse relation between the
number of protothecal organisms and the number of infiltrating macrophages, neutrophils,
T lymphocytes, and B lymphocytes.P'" These findings suggest either that protothecal
organisms inhibit the migration or proliferation of cellular inflammatory infiltrate or that
only dead organisms induce an effective local immune response.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Protothecosis is a rare disease. Collies appear to be predisposed, and the majority of
Prototheca spp. infections have occurred in females. 242 , 244. 245 Dogs with disseminated
protothecosis frequently have colitis and ocular and central nervous system involvement,
but they rarely have skin Iesions.v" Disseminated disease is almost always associated with
P. zopfii.
Dogs with cutaneous or mucocutaneous protothecosis usually do not have clinical
signs of systemic involvement, and infection is invariably due to P. wickerhamii. 239 , 241, 246
Dermatologic lesions may include multiple papules and nodules, often over pressure
points, or nodules and ulcers involving mucocutaneous junctions (especially nostrils), scrotum, and footpads (see Fig. 5-46G and H). Depigmentation of the nasal planum may be
striking (see Fig. 5_46).239

406 • Fungal Skin Diseases
Cat
Protothecosis is a rare disease. Only cutaneous involvement has been reported, and all
cats were in good health otherwise. Skin lesions may be solitary to multiple; they occur as
firm papular to nodular masses or fluctuant subcutaneous growths. 240. 245 Lesions have
most commonly been on the paws and legs, but they have also occurred on the nose,
head, and pinnae and on the base of the tail. Only P. wickerhamii has been isolated.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes infectious, foreign-body, and sterile granulomas, abscesses, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation with numerous intracellular spherules that
are round, oval, or polyhedral; nonbudding; and 2 to 30 J.Lm in diameter.1-3. 9, 10, 245 The
fungi reproduce by endosporulation, and internal cleavage planes are visible in larger
spherules, which may contain 2 to 20 endospores. The characteristic morphologic form of
Prototheca spp. is the "morula," wherein the internal septation of spherules into multiple
endospores results in a "wheel-like" or "daisy-like" appearance.
Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse, pyogranulomatous to granulomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with numerous fungal elements (Figs. 5-55 and 5-56). Prototheca
spp. grow on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C (inhibited by cycloheximide) and blood
agar at 37°C, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture. The API 20C
system can be used on cultures for species identification, as can fluorescent antibody
techniques on formalin-fixed tissue. I, 3. 238. 245
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Solitary lesions in otherwise healthy patients, especially cats, may be surgically excised and
the patient cured.240.241 A variety of antimicrobials (including amphotericin B and sodium

FIGURE 5-55. Protothecosis in a dog, Diffuse granulomatous dermatitis with numerous multinucleated
histiocytic giant cells.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 407

FIGURE 5-56. Protothecosis in a dog. Numerous organisms demonstrate internal cleavage planes
(arrow) (GMS stain).

iodide) have been tried therapeutically, but treatment has failed in most instances. Clinical
response to antimicrobial agents frequently fails to correlate with in vitro susceptibility test
results.F" Amphotericin B and tetracycline act synergistically to inhibit the growth of P.
wickerhamii; this combination has been successfully used to treat protothecosis in humans. 238 . 245 Ketoconazole (see page 412) administered orally has been curative in some
cases in dogs and humans.s-' 245. 246 Therapy is usually prolonged (2 to 4 months) and
should be continued for 3 to 4 weeks beyond clinical cure. In one dog, skin lesions
continued to recur each time ketoconazole administration was stopped, even after treatment periods of 10 months.P?

Trichosporon Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Trichosporon spp, are ubiquitous yeastlike fungi that exist in nature as soil saprophytes
and as a minor component of normal skin, haircoat, and mucosal flora in humans and
animals.l'" 248 In humans, most cases of Trichosporon infection have been disseminated,
fatal, and reported in association with severe immunosuppression. The organism is believed to produce opportunistic infections by invading mucosal or cutaneous surfaces.P'" In
cats, evidence for immunosuppression has not been present in all affected animals, but
one had multicentric lymphoma.
CLINICAL FINDINGS
To date, Trichosporon dermatitis has been reported only in cats,247, 248 and the disease
appears to be extremely rare, Affected cats have presented with solitary papular or
nodular lesions on the nostril or a solitary ulcerated nodule at the site of a bite wound on
a distal limb. Trichosporon beigelii (Trichosporon cutaneum) and T. pullulans have been
isolated in culture,

408 • Fungal Skin Diseases
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes numerous infectious granulomas, foreign-body granulomas, and neoplasms. Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation and numerous pleomorphic fungal elements, including septate,
branching hyphae, arthroconidia (2.5 to 10.4 JLm), and pleomorphic blastoconidia (2.5 to 8
JLm in diameterl.e'"- 248 Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis with numerous fungal elements. Mycotic invasion of blood vessels may be visible;
this often results in areas of necrosis. Trichosporon can be grown on Sabouraud's dextrose
agar, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Trichosporon spp. are generally more susceptible to azole compounds than to amphotericin B or Hucytosine.P" Affected cats should be treated with oral ketoconazole or itraconazole. Not enough cases have been treated to allow detailed therapeutic and prognostic
recommendations.

Geotrichum Dermatitis
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Geotrichum candidum is a ubiquitous soil saprophyte and a minor component of the
normal flora of the oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, and integument. I, 233, 248a The organism is believed to produce opportunistic infections by invading mucosal or cutaneous
surfaces.
CLINICAL FINDINGS

Geotrichum dermatitis appears to be extremely rare. Geotrichum was cultured from both
a cat with a nonhealing wound on its back and its owner, who had a granulomatous
infection of the skin and subcutis." One dog had a pinnal and periocular dermatitis that
"spread" to its handler (human culture was not performedj.P'? Another dog had a symmetric onychodystrophy from which Geotrichum was repeatedly isolated.'! A healthy 5-monthold Rottweiler had 2 nodules, one on the head and one on the rump.248a
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination of aspirates or direct smears reveals suppurative to pyogranulomatous inflammation with broad (3 to 6 JLm in diameter), septate, infrequently branched
hyphae, spherical yeastlike cells, and rectangular or cylindrical arthroconidia (4 to 10 JLm
wide) with rounded or squared ends.'- 2, 8-10 Biopsy findings include nodular to diffuse,
suppurative to pyogranulomatous dermatitis with numerous fungal elements. In one dog,
biopsy specimens were characterized by suppurative epidermitis and folliculitis and by
pyogranulomatous furunculosis, in which only a few fungal hyphae were seen, mainly
adherent to follicular keratin and hair shafts. 248a Geotrichum grows on Sabouraud's dextrose agar at 25°C, and punch biopsies are the preferred material for culture.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Little information is available on the treatment of Geotrichum dermatitis, One cat and its
owner were cured with amphotericin B.8 One dog was cured with the topical application
of mtconazole.P" The Rottweiler puppy described in Clinical Findings was cured after
surgical excision of the two nodules. 248a

Fungal Skin Diseases • 409

• ANTIFUNGAL THERAPY

Topical
Topical therapy (see Table 5-3) is often curative in superficial yeast infections (Malassezia, Candida) and may be curative or adjunctive in dermatophytosis. Dermatophyte infections are difficult because the fungi are relatively protected within hair shafts and hair
follicles. Topical agents tend to be more effective in short-coated animals, for localized
alopecic lesions, and in long-haired animals that have been clipped. Many topical antifungal agents are of historical interest only and are not discussed in this text. Examples of
such products include povidone-iodine, sodium hypochlorite, tolnaftate, Whitfield's ointment (benzoic and salicylic acids), Gentian violet, potassium permanganate, and so
forth. 256 The interested reader is referred to previous editions of this book. Dermatophytosis is a difficult situation. Topical antifungal agents kill unprotected hyphae and spores
rapidly, but not hyphae and spores within hairs. 38 • 72,

SPOT TREATMENTS
Focal applications of topical antifungal agents are useful for the treatment of candidiasis,
Malassezia dermatitis, and localized dermatophyte lesions in dogs and shorthaired cats.
Nystatin and amphotericin B 3% are polyene antibiotics that bind with ergosterol in
fungal cell membranes, resulting in altered cell permeability and eventual cell death.F"
Either product may be applied every 12 hours to treat Candida or Malassezia infections,
but they are not effective against dermatophytes. Nystatin is also available in combination
with triamcinolone for highly inflammatory lesions.
Azoles inhibit the synthesis of ergosterol, triglyceride, phospholipid, chitin, and oxidative and peroxidative enzymes. 152, 256, 257 The imidazoles clotrimazole 1% and miconazole
1% or 2% may be applied every 12 hours for the treatment of dermatophytosis, candidiasis, and Malassezia dermatitis.F" Thiabendazole 4% with dexamethasone 0.1% may be
applied every 12 hours for the treatment of highly inflammatory dermatophyte lesions
(kerions) or highly inflammatory Malassezia lesions (skin or ear).
Naftifine 1% (Naftin cream or gel) and terbinafine 1% (Lamisil cream) are allylamines
that bind to stratum corneum and penetrate into hair follicles.P" They inhibit ergosterol
biosynthesis and squalene epoxidase and may be applied every 12 hours for the treatment
of dermatophytosis and candidiasis. Naftifine also has anti-inflammatory activity and is
useful for highly inflammatory dermatophyte lesions.
Chlorhexidine 4% (ChlorhexiDerm Maximum spray) is a synthetic biguanide (see
Chap. 3 for details) that may be applied every 12 hours for the treatment of Malassezia
and Candida infections and dermatophytosis.

SHAMPOOS
Antifungal shampoos are useful for the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis. However,
because of their lack of demonstrated efficacy against dermatophytes and the danger of
dispersing arthrospores into the haircoat and environment as a result of their application,
shampoos are not recommended for the treatment of dermatophytosis. However, one
study suggested that simultaneous treatment of dermatophytosis due to M. canis in
Persian cats with oral griseofulvin and a 2% chlorhexidine/2% miconazole shampoo resulted in quicker resolution of clinical signs and less environmental contamination than
with oral griseofulvin alone.??
Shampoos containing 2% to 4% chlorhexidine or 2% miconazole are effective for the
treatment of Malassezia dermatitis and are the least likely to be drying or irritating. Daily
application is most effective but more likely to be irritating, and it is impractical for most
owners. Twice-weekly applications (every 3 days) seem to be adequate in most cases.
For animals who are particularly greasy or waxy, selenium sulfide 1% or sulfur 2%

410 • Fungal Skin Diseases

with benzoyl peroxide 2.5% are effective. These two products can be too drying and are
more likely to be irritating than chlorhexidine or miconazole.

RINSES
Antifungal rinses are the most effective topical products for the treatment of widespread
superficial mycoses. They have more residual activity than shampoos. The preferred products are lime sulfur 2% (see Chap. 3 for details) or enilconazole 0.2%.30.36.95 Enilconazole
is an imidazole that is not presently approved in the United States. Although anecdotal
information had suggested that enilconazole was not well-tolerated in cats," a study in
Persian cats indicated that no clinical, hematologic, or biochemical toxicities were observed." Enilconazole is reported to be safe and effective for cats in France.f" 255 Many
people find the odor of the product to be objectionable. Enilconazole infusions are also
one of the most effective methods for the treatment of nasal aspergillosis.P?
Lime sulfur is typically applied once or twice weekly for Malassezia dermatitis and
every 5 to 7 days for dermatophytosis (see Chap. 3 for details). Enilconazole is applied
twice weekly.
Another useful rinse for the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis is acetic acid 2.5%
(see Chap. 3 for details). The solution can be prepared by combining equal parts of
vinegar (5% acetic acid) and water. The solution is well tolerated on the skin (not in the
ears!) and is particularly useful as a foot soak (5 to 10 minutes daily) for Malassezia
pododermatitis.

Systemic
The most common indication for systemic antifungal therapy (see Table 5-4) is dermatophytosis. Griseofulvin is still the systemic antifungal agent of choice in these cases. 66 , 69.
71, 73 However, if it is ineffective, has caused complications, or is otherwise contraindicated, ketoconazole or itraconazole may be acceptable alternatives. For Malassezia infections, griseofulvin is not effective and ketoconazole is the drug of choice. Other regimens
or treatments may be necessary for the less commonly encountered mycotic infections.
Newer antifungals, particularly the triazole compounds and the allylamines, are available,
but in general, they still have not been shown to be preferred over griseofulvin for routine
use. In addition, they are not approved for use in the United States. Finally, they are
expensive.

GRISEOFULVIN
Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antibiotic obtained by fermentation from several species of
Penicillium. Its antifungal activity results from the inhibition of cell wall synthesis, nucleic
acid synthesis, and mitosis. This agent is primarily active against growing cells, although
dormant cells may be inhibited from reproducing. 256 . 261 The drug inhibits nucleic acid
synthesis and cell mitosis by arresting division at metaphase, interfering with the function
of spindle microtubules, morphogenetic changes in fungal cells, and possibly antagonizing
chitin synthesis in the fungal cell wall. After oral administration, the drug may be detected
in the stratum corneum within 8 hours to 3 days. The highest concentrations are attained
in the stratum corneum and the lowest are in the basal layers. The drug is carried to the
stratum corneum by diffusion, sweating, and transepidermal fluid loss and is deposited in
keratin precursor cells and remains bound during the differentiation process. Consequently, new growth of hair or claws is the first to be free from disease. Because
griseofulvin is not tightly bound to keratin, tissue levels drop rapidly when therapy is
stopped. Thus, it must be administered until an infected claw grows out, which takes
months.
Griseofulvin is in a state of flux in the skin; consequently, a dosage administered once
or twice daily is needed to maintain constant blood levels. When therapy is stopped,
.stratum corneum levels are gone in 2 to 3 days. This drug is indicated for only dermato-

Fungal Skin Diseases • 41 1

phyte infections (Microsporum and Trichophyton). It is not effective against yeasts (Candida and Malassezia).
Griseofulvin is variably and incompletely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
Therefore, not all animals respond at the lower end of the dosage scale. If response is
poor, the dosage may have to be increased. It should be given with a fatty meal to
enhance absorption. Griseofulvin has a disagreeable taste, and nausea may be seen.
Dividing daily doses increases absorption and reduces nausea. The particle size of the
drug also affects absorption, and this influences the dosage. There are two common forms,
a microsize crystal Fulvicin-UIF (Schering) given in a dosage of 25 to 60 mglkg q12h (the
most common initial dose is 25 mglkg qI2h), and ultramicrosize Gris-PEG in polyethylene
glycol (Herbert) given in a dosage of 2.5 to 15 mglkg ql2h. This difference is important
to recognize or toxicities may result. Idiosyncratic toxic reactions, particularly bone marrow
suppression, have been reported.P"
In problem cases, the dosage of micro size griseofulvin can be increased to at least 120
mglkglday with reasonable safety. One author recommended that kittens younger than 12
weeks of age not receive griseofulvin, although some clinicians use it in kittens as young
as 6 weeks.P: 25. 66 Kunkle and Meyer gave cats 110 to 145 mglkg daily for 11 weeks
without any signs of clinical, hematologic, or hepatic toxicity.262 They concluded that
abnormalities developing with the use of high-dose griseofulvin therapy may be an idiosyncratic reaction found in only a few cats. Anecdotal reports suggest that adverse reactions to griseofulvin may be more common and severe in Persians, Himalayans, Siamese,
and Abyssinians, but this has not been our experience.v"
Griseofulvin is a potent teratogen266; therefore, it is absolutely contraindicated in
pregnant animals. However, many clinicians have administered griseofulvin to cats during
the last week of pregnancy with no ill effects.P 261 Because griseofulvin can cause abnormalities in spermatozoa in rodents, it is advisable to avoid using recently treated male cats
for breeding." The most common problem is gastrointestinal upsets that resolve when the
drug is discontinued. Anemia, leukopenia, depression, ataxia, and pruritus have also been
reported.13. 260 Rarely reported adverse cutaneous reactions include maculopapular or
exfoliative eruptions as well as erythema multiforme or toxic epidermal necrolysis. They
usually regress when the drug is withdrawn, although fatal reactions may occur. Hemograms every 2 weeks and careful observation are advisable during therapy to monitor
those blood variables and the early onset of toxicity. The bone marrow reactions occur
more commonly in cats with FIV infection, and screening before therapy is indicated.P"
Although produced by various species of Penicillium, griseofulvin, penicillins, and cephalosporins rarely exhibit cross-reactive side effects.
Griseofulvin does have anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties and is
known to suppress delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions and irritant reactions in the
skin. 253 • 263. 268 These properties can lead to important clinical misinterpretations. We have
seen dogs and cats whose inflammatory skin diseases (e.g., bacterial pyoderma and pemphigus foliaceus) showed significant improvement while the animals were receiving large
doses of griseofulvin for presumed dermatophytosis.

AZOLES
The systemically administered azoles include the imidazole, ketoconazole, and the triazoles
itraconazole and fluconazole. 256-259 They inhibit the cytochrome P-450 enzyme, lanosterol
14-demethylase, thereby inhibiting the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol and causing
the accumulation of C14 methylated sterols. Other actions include an inhibition of intracellular triglyceride and phospholipid biosynthesis, inhibition of cell wall chitin synthesis,
and inhibition of oxidative and peroxidative enzymes. The potency of each azole is related
to its affinity for binding the cytochrome P-450 moiety. The relative toxicity of each azole
is associated with the selectivity of its action on fungal versus mammalian enzymes. Side
effects occur in about 10% of dogs and 25% of cats treated with ketoconazole. Side
effects are much less frequent and, in general, less severe with itraconazole and fluconazole.

412 • Fungal Skin Diseases

Because the triazoles and allylamines are lipophilic and keratinophilic and because
therapeutic levels persist in the skin and nails of humans for several days to weeks after
treatment is stopped, shorter durations of treatment and pulse regimens (e.g., once-aweek dosing or 1 week of treatment per month) are feasible. 254 , 256-258, 265 This has not
been investigated in dogs and cats.
Drug interactions with the azoles are well-recognized.P?" Interactions with certain
antihistamines (terfenadine, astemizole), gastrointestinal motility agents (cisapride), benzodiazepines, calcium channel blockers, anticonvulsants, antimycobacterial agents, and cyclosporine are of particular concern.
Ketoconazole

Ketoconazole (Nizoral [janssenj) is an imidazole that is active against many fungi and
yeasts, including dermatophytes, Candida, Malassezia, and numerous dimorphic fungi
responsible for systemic mycoses.P" 59, 256, 259. 261 The therapeutic effect of ketoconazole is
delayed for about 5 to 10 days. Consequently, in serious cases of systemic fungal disease,
amphotericin B, which acts rapidly, is often used in combination with ketoconazole to
compensate for this initial delay. Alternatively, one can use itraconazole or fluconazole.
Ketoconazole is insoluble in water but soluble in dilute acid solutions, and increased
gastric acidity promotes absorption. When it is given with food, especially tomato juice,
absorption is enhanced. Still, ketoconazole is variably absorbed, which probably accounts
for the variation of doses needed in certain patients. It should not be given with gastric
antacids, H 2 blockers, or anticholinergics. The major routes of delivery of ketoconazole to
the stratum corneum are via sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratinocytes.
Ketoconazole is not approved for use in dogs and cats in the United States. A dosage of
10 mglkg every 24 hours is effective for dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, and
candidiasis. For systemic mycoses, higher dosages (30 to 40 mglkg/day) are more commonly needed. Because ketoconazole does not readily enter the central nervous system, a
dosage of 40 mglkg every 24 hours is commonly necessary for life-threatening central
nervous system and nasal mycoses.
About 10% of treated dogs experience side effects, including inappetence, vomiting,
pruritus, alopecia, and a reversible lightening of the haircoat.I" 259. 261 Side effects are
more common with doses in excess of 10 mglkg/day. It also enhances the effects of
anticoagulants and increases the blood levels of cyclosporine and antihistamines, and its
concentration may be decreased if it is given concurrently with rifampin. At dosages
higher than 40 mglkg/day, there were anorexia, nausea, and increased liver enzyme levels.
Cats are more sensitive; about 25% experience side effects, including anorexia, fever,
depression, vomiting, diarrhea, elevated liver enzymes, rarely icterus or neurologic abnormalities, and even death; therefore, one rarely exceeds 10 mglkg/24 hours or 20 mg/kgl48
hours in cats. Cholangiohepatitis has also occurred in cats treated with ketoconazole.P
Ketoconazole is embryotoxic and teratogenic in rodents, causes mummified fetuses and
stillbirths in bitches, and is not recommended in pregnant animals. In dosages of 10 mg/
kg/day or greater, it suppressed basal cortisol concentration and response to adrenocorticotropic hormone, suppressed serum testosterone concentrations, and increased serum progesterone concentrations in dogs. 271
When administration of the drug is halted, a sharp rebound of testosterone levels
occurs. In therapeutic use, one should be aware of the possible effect on libido and
breeding effectiveness in male animals, adrenal insufficiency, the possibility of inducing or
exacerbating prostate disease, and the potential for managing prostate disease, mammary
carcinoma, and spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism.P Ketoconazole also has various immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects, including suppression of neutrophil chemotaxis and lymphocyte blastogenic responses, inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase activity, and inhibition of leukotriene production.P': 270, 272
In veterinary medicine, ketoconazole is effective in the treatment of dermatophytosis,
candidiasis, Malassezia dermatitis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, and
cryptococcosis. In addition, it may be effective in some cases of mycetoma, phaeohypho-

Fungal Skin Diseases • 413
mycosis, zygomycosis, sporotrichosis, alternariosis, aspergillosis, and protothecosis. Ketoconazole is often prescribed in combination with amphotericin B for systemic infections
because the antifungal activity of both seems to be enhanced.
Itraconazole

Itraconazole (Sporanox [janssenj) is a triazole, and, compared with ketoconazole, has
increased potency, decreased toxicity, and wider spectrum of action.P: 257, 259, 261 Susceptible organisms include dermatophytes, Candida spp., Malassezia, those causing many intermediate and deep mycoses, Aspergillus, Sporotrichum, and the protozoans Leishmania and
Trypanosoma. The drug is given orally, with food, and concurrent antacids, H 2 blockers,
and anticholinergics are contraindicated. For cats and small dogs, the capsules may be
opened and the pellets mixed with food. A pediatric suspension is also available for oral
administration and, because its bioavailability is greater than that of the capsules, does not
need to be given with food. In cats, 10 mglkg/day should be sufficient in most cases. 250
Some cats may require lO/mglkg ql2h. Occasional cats better tolerate 20 mg/kg q48h.
Anecdotal reports indicate that these doses of itraconazole often produce vomiting
and/or anorexia in cats. 54 Lower doses of itraconazole (1.5 to 3.0 mg/kg/day) produced
complete recovery (clinical and cultural) in only 8 of 15 cats with M. canis infection. 54 In
dogs, most authors recommend 10 mg/kg/day.!" 259 although a recent study indicated that
5 mglkg/day was just as effective and caused less side effects. 224 The major routes of
delivery to the stratum corneum are sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratinocytes.
Itraconazole is lipophilic and keratinophilic, and levels in skin and claws may be 3 to
10 times higher than those in plasma. In humans, skin and nail levels persist up to 4
weeks and 6 to 9 months, respectively, after therapy is stopped.P" Side effects are similar
to those occurring with ketoconazole, but they occur much less frequently and with
reduced severity. Because itraconazole is more specific for fungal than mammalian cytochrome P-450 enzymes, endocrinologic side effects are not produced.
Like ketoconazole, itraconazole also has various immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties. 265 , 270, 272 Toxicity studies in dogs showed that, even at a dosage of 40
mglkg/day for 90 days, there were no reactions.P? Although it is not recommended during
pregnancy owing to teratogenic effects at high dosages, there were no detectable teratogenic effects at 10 mglkg/day. In cats, 50 to 100 mglkg/day produced some side effects,
which appeared to be dose-dependent. Anorexia, nausea, and hepatotoxicity were the
primary side effects and usually resolved after drug withdrawal. In dogs, doses of 10 mg/
kg/day produce vasculitis and necroulcerative skin lesions in 7.5% of dogs treated.F" These
lesions did not occur at doses of 5 mglkg/day. In humans, intermittant ("pulse") therapy
(e.g., standard doses for 1 week each month) is effective.P"
Fluconazole

Fluconazole (Diflucan [RoerigJ) is a triazole and, compared with ketoconazole, has increased potency, decreased toxicity, and a wider spectrum of action: Susceptible organisms
include dermatophytes, Candida, Malassezia, and those causing deep and intermediate
mycoses. The drug can be given with or without food. The major routes of delivery to the
stratum corneum are sweat, sebum, and incorporation into basal keratinocytes. High levels
are achieved in skin, claw, and even the cerebrospinal fluid. Therapeutic levels persist in
stratum corneum for 10 days after therapy is stopped. In humans, fluconazole persists in
nails for 3 to 6 months post treatment.Ff- 265 Because fluconazole is the most fungal
enzyme-specific of the three systemic azoles, side effects are rare. 269 Only extremely high
doses are embryotoxic and teratogenic, and endocrinologic side effects are not produced.
Recommended doses of fluconazole in cats and dogs vary from 10 to 20 mg/kg q12h
to 10 mglkg q8h. 205 , 252, 259 The results of two pharmacokinetic studies indicate that
fluconazole can effectively be administered to cats at 50 mg/cat q24h. 252, 269 In humans,
intermittant therapy (e.g., every other day; once weekly) is effective. 265

414 • Fungal Skin Diseases
IODIDES
Iodides are given orally in daily doses of saturated solutions." 13, 256, 261 They have a
disagreeable taste and may cause nausea and iodism, especially in cats. Iodism may
manifest as vomiting, diarrhea, depression, and anorexia. In dogs, ocular and nasal discharge, scaling, and a dry haircoat may be visible. Other signs that have been described in
cats include twitching, hypothermia, and cardiovascular failure. Although iodides are
widely distributed in the body, their mechanism of action is unknown because they have
no efficacy against fungal organisms in vitro. Iodides do enhance the halide-peroxidase
killing system of phagocytic cells. Iodides are anti-inflammatory agents by virtue of their
ability to quench toxic oxygen metabolites and inhibit neutrophil chemotaxis.
Iodides are highly effective in the treatment of cutaneous and cutaneolymphatic
sporotrichosis. A supersaturated solution of potassium iodide is used. Dogs are given 40
mg/kg orally q12h with food, and iodides are best tolerated when given with a fatty liquid
such as cream or whole milk.5, 261 Cats are given 10 to 20 mglkg q12h to q24h with food.
Cats may better tolerate the taste of sodium iodide over that of potassium iodide. 5,261

AMPHOTERICIN B
Amphotericin B (Fungizone [Squibb]) is a generally fungistatic polyene antibiotic that
disrupts fungal (and bacterial) cell membranes by irreversible binding with ergosterol.P: 256, 261 This results in altered cell permeability, leakage of intracellular constituents,
and cell death. It also binds to a lesser extent to other sterols, such as cholesterol in
mammalian cell membranes, and therefore is relatively toxic. Other possible mechanisms
of action include oxidative membrane damage and enhanced cell-mediated immunity.
Amphotericin B stimulates lymphocyte, macrophage, and neutrophil function and
induces production of tumor necrosis factor. 272 Amphotericin B is most effective for
blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, and candidiasis: In the
first three diseases when combined with ketoconazole, and in the last two when combined
with flucytosine. These combination protocols are used to take advantage of the prompt
action of amphotericin B and to reduce its toxicity.
Problems of therapy include nephrotoxicity (especially in dehydrated and hyponatremic animals), anemia, phlebitis, and hypokalemia.s'" One should avoid concurrent use
of nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides) and potassium-depleting diuretics. Amphotericin B may also be useful in the treatment of Aspergillus, Trichosporon, Zygomycetes, and
disseminated Sporotrichum infections.
Organisms tend to develop resistance to the drug. Amphotericin given systemically
must be given intravenously dissolved only in 5% dextrose and water. A reasonable dosage
is as follows: 0.5 mglkg on alternate days for dogs and 0.15 mglkg for cats, which are
more sensitive. Treatment with this drug is dangerous and complicated, and clinicians are
advised to consult other references for specific gUidelines.6, 14,261
An amphotericin B lipid complex (Abelcet [The Liposome Company]) is reported to
maintain therapeutic efficacy while being only one tenth as toxic as traditional amphotericin B solutions.222, 263a Amphotericin B was also reported to be useful when administered
subcutaneously by gravity flow, but this study is difficult to interpret and needs further
evaluation.206

FLUCYTOSINE
Flucytosine (Ancobon [Roche]) is an orally administered fluorinated pyrimidine that has
been useful against Candida, Cryptococcus, Aspergillus, and some fungi associated with
phaeohyphomycosis.P: 256, 261 Fungal cells are susceptible if they contain the enzyme
cytosine permease, which enables 5-fluorocytosine to be taken into the fungal cell, where
it is deaminated by cytosine deaminase to 5-fluoro-21-deoxyuridylic acid. These substances inhibit thymidylate synthetase and subsequent DNA synthesis.

Fungal Skin Diseases • 415

Resistant, mutant organisms emerge regularly and rapidly in the presence of the drug,
which is why it is combined with amphotericin B. The oral dosage is 60 mg/kg q8h, but it
is used as a second-line treatment, when more effective drugs, such as the imidazole and
thiazole derivatives, are not available or are not well tolerated. As a single agent, flucytosine rarely produces side effects. Hematologic, gastrointestinal, and hepatic toxicities are
reported. Fixed drug eruptions on the scrotum of dogs and toxic epidermal necrolysis
have occurred.

TERBINAFINE
Terbinafine (Lamisil [Novartis]) is an allylamine that is well absorbed orally in the presence or absence of food."? It inhibits ergosterol biosynthesis and squalene epoxidase,
resulting in fungal cell wall ergosterol deficiency and the intracellular accumulation of
squalene. Terbinafine is fungistatic and fungicidal. Because it is generally not inhibitory to
cytochrome P-450 systems, it is more selective than the azoles.
Terbinafine is lipophilic and keratinophilic and achieves high concentrations in stratum corneum, hair, sebum, and subcutaneous fat. The stratum corneum/plasma ratio
varies from 13:1 to 73:1. The drug is delivered to the stratum corneum primarily via the
sebum, then through the basal keratinocytes and to a lesser extent by diffusion through
the dermis and epidermis. In humans, terbinafine persists in therapeutic levels in the skin
for 2 to 3 weeks and in the nails for 2 to 3 months.
Terbinafine is active against dermatophytes, Candida spp., Sporotrichum, and Aspergillus spp. The major side effects are gastrointestinal. No embryonic or fetal toxicity or
teratogenicity has been demonstrated.
There have been anecdotal reports of the use of terbinafine for the treatment of dogs
and cats with dermatophytosis. Terbinafine (20 mglkg q48h PO) was reported to be
effective for dermatophytosis in cats, and no toxicities were noted.F" Terbinafine (20 to 30
mglkg q24h PO) was also reported to be effective and safe for the treatment of dermatophytosis in dogs. 251

• REFERENCES
General Laboratory, Pathology, and Clinical
Bibliography
1. Carter GR, Cole JR Jr: Diagnostic Procedures in Veterinary Bacteriology and Mycology V. Academic
Press, New York, 1990.
2. Carter GR, Chengappa MM: Essentials of Veterinary
Bacteriology and Mycology IV. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1991.
3. Chandler FW, Watts JC: Pathologic Diagnosis of
Fungal Infections. ASCP Press, Chicago, 1987.
4. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dermatology in General Medicine IV. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1993.
5. Foil CS: Fungal diseases. Clin Dermatol 12:529,
1994.
6. Greene CE: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat
II. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1998.
7. Gross TL, et aI: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
8. Holzworth J: Mycotic diseases. In: Holzworth J (ed):
Diseases of the Cat. Medicine and Surgery, Vol 1.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1987, p 320.
9. Kwon-Chung KJ, Bennett JE: Medical Mycology. Lea
& Febiger, Philadelphia, 1992.
10. Rippon JW: Medical Mycology III. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1988.
lOa. Saridomichelakis MN, et aI: Recovery of Microsporum gypseum and Malassetia pachydermatis from the

nasal bridge in various dog groups. Vet Rec 145:171,
1999.
11. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claws and
clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
12. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claws and
clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Educ 14:449, 1992.
13. Scott OW, et aI: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1995.
13a. Sierra P, et aI: Fungal flora on cutaneous and mucosal surfaces of cats infected with feline immunodeficiency virus or feline leukemia immunodeficiency virus or feline leukemia virus. Am J Vet Res 61:158,
2000.
14. Wolf AM, Troy GC: Deep mycotic diseases. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Internal
Medicine IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995,
p 439.

Dermatophytosis
15. Antos I, et aI: Nachweis von Dermatophyten bei klinisch gesunder Katzen und Hunden in Wien. Wien
Tieraztl Mschr 83:199, 1996.
16. Bibel OJ, Smiljanic RJ: Interactions of Trichophyton
mentagrophytes and micrococci in skin culture. J Invest Dermatol 72:133, 1979.
17. Blakemore JC: Dermatomycosis. In: Kirk RW (ed):

416 • Fungal Skin Diseases
Current Veterinary Therapy V. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1974, p 422.
18. Bond R, et al: Chronic dermatophytosis due to Microsporum persicolor infection in three dogs. J Small
Anim Pract 33:571, 1992.
19. Borikar ST, Singh BA: A note on clinical ringworm in
domestic animals. Indian Vet J 71:98, 1994.
20. Bonrdeau P, et al: Quelqnes formes rares de dermatomycoses des carnivores domestiques. 2e cas: Dermatite generalisee du chien due 11 une infection mixte
par Microsporum persicolor et 11 Microsporum gypseum. Point Vet 14:69, 1983.
21. Bourdeau P, Chermette R: Formes rares de dermatomycoses des carnivores. IIle cas: Dermatite localisee
du chien due 11 une infection mixte par Trichophyton
mentagrophytes et Trichophyton erinacei. Point Vet
19:619, 1987.
22. Bourdeau P: Que! est votre diagnostic? Point Vet 19:
665, 1987.
23. Bonrdeau P, et al: Trichophyton ajelloi in a dog. Proc
Annu Cong Enr Soc Vet Dermatol Enr Coli Vet Dermatol 14:188, 1997.
24. Bonrdzi HE: Study of canine ringworm epidemiology
in Thessaloniki area. Bull Hellenic Vet Med Soc 48:
87, 1997.
25. Bussieras J, et al: Quelques formes rares de dermatomycoses des carnivores domestiques. ler cas: Dermatite generalisee du chien, due 11 une infection mixte
par Microsporum canis et par Trichophyton mentagrophytes. Point Vet 13:43, 1982.
26. Cabafies FJ, et al: Seasonal study of the fungal biota
of the fur of dogs. Mycopathologia 133:1, 1996.
27. Cabafies FJ, et al: Dermatophytes isolated from domestic animals in Barcelona, Spain. Mycopathologia
137:107, 1997.
28. Carlotti DN: Traitement des teignes chez Ie chat.
Point Vet 29:681, 1998.
29. Carlotti DN, Bensigncr E: Dermatophytosis duc to
Microsporum persicolor (13 cases) or Microsporum
gypseum (20 cases) in dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:17,
1999.
30. Carney HC, Moriello KA: Dermatophytosis: Cattery
management plan. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Cnrrent
Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1993, P 34.
31. Dahl MV: Suppression of immunity and inflammation
by products produced by dermatophytes. J Am Acad
Dermatol 28:S19, 1993.
32. DeBoer DJ, et al: Immunological reactivity to intradermal dermatophyte antigens in cats with dermatophytosis. Vet Dermatol 2:59, 1991.
33. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Development of an experimental model of Microsporum canis infection in cats.
Vet Microbiol 42:289, 1994.
34. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: The immune response to
Microsporum canis induced by a fungal cell wall vaccine. Vet Dermatol 5:47, 1994.
35. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Investigations of a killed
dermatophyte cell-wall vaccine against infection with
Microsporum canis in cats. Res Vet Sci 59:1100,
1995.
36. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Inability of two topical
treatments to influence the conrse of experimentally
induced dermatophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:52, 1995.
37. DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Clinical update on feline
dermatophytosis-part I. Compend Contin Educ 17:
1197, 1995.

38. DeBoer DJ, et al: Clinical update on feline dermatophytosis-part II. Compend Contin Educ 17:1471,
1995.
39. De Jaham C, et al: Enilconazole emulsion in the
treatment of dermatophytosis in Persian cats: Tolerance and suitability. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 299.
40. DeJaham C, Paradis M: La dermatophyte feline I:
Etiopathogenie, aspects cliniques et principes diagnostiques. Med vet Quebec 27:141, 1997.
41. DeJaham C, Paradis M: La dermatophyte feline II:
Modalites therapeutiques, Med Vet Quebec 27:147,
1997.
42. Ferreiro L, et al: Relations between canine and feline
dermatophytosis and enzymatic activity of Microsporum canis strains. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 470.
42a. Flaig K, et al: Microsporum canis als Ursache eines
Dermatophyten-Pseudomyzetoms bei einer Katze.
Prak Tierarztl 80:398, 1999.
43. Foil CS: Dermatophytosis. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds):
Cnrrent Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book,
St. Louis, 1993, P 22.
44. Gabal MA: Antifungal activity of ketoconazole with
emphasis on zoophilic fungal pathogens. Am J Vet
Res 47:1229, 1986.
45. Jones HE: Immune response and host resistance of
humans to dermatophyte infection. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:S12, 1993.
46. Kaplan W, Ivens MS: Observations on seasonal variations in incidence of ringworm in dogs and cats in the
U.S.A. Sabouraudia 1:91, 1961.
47. Knudsen EA: The areal extent of dermatophyte infection. Br J Dermatol 92:413, 1975.
48. Larsson CE, et al: Ringworm in domestic cats in Sao
Paulo, Brazil, between 1981-1990. Feline Pract
22(3):11, 1994.
49. Lewis DT, et al: Epidemiology and clinical features
of dermatophytosis in dogs and cats at Louisiana
State University: 1981-1990. Vet Dermatol 2:51,
1991.
50. Leyden 11: Progression of interdigital infections from
simplex to complex. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:S7,
1993.
51. Lueker DC, Kainer RA: Hyperthermia for the treatment of dermatomycosis in dogs and cats. Vet Med
Small Anim Clin 76:658, 1981.
52. MacKay BM, et al: Severe dermatophyte infections in
a dog and cat. Aust Vet Practit 27:86, 1997.
53. Mancianti F, Papini R: Isolation of keratinophilic
fungi from the floors of private veterinary clinics in
Italy. Vet Res Commun 20:161, 1996.
54. Mancianti F, et al: Efficacy of oral administration of
itraconazole to cats with dermatophytosis caused by
Microsporum canis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:993,
1998.
55. Mancianti F, et al: Itraconazole susceptibility of feline
isolates of Microsporum canis. Mycoses 40:313, 1997.
56. Medleau L, Ristic Z: Diagnosing dermatophytosis in
dogs and cats. Vet Med 87:1086, 1992.
57. Medleau L, Kuhl KA: Dealing with chronic recurring
dermatophytosis. Vet Med 87:1101, 1992.
58. Medleau L, White-Weithers NE: Treating and preventing the various forms of dermatophytosis. Vet
Med 87:1096, 1992.
59. Medleau L, Chalmers SA: Ketoconazole for treatment

Fungal Skin Diseases • 4 I 7
of dermatophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:
77, 1992.
60. Medleau L, Chalmers SA: Resolution of generalized
dermatophytosis without treatment in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 201:1891, 1992.
61. Medleau L, Rakich PM: Microsporum canis pseudomycetomas in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:573,
1994.
62. Mercantini R, et al: Epidemiology of dermatophytoses
observed in Rome, Italy between 1985 and 1993. Mycoses 38:415, 1995.
63. Mignon BR, Losson BJ: Prevalence and characterization of Microsporum canis carriage in cats. J Med Vet
Mycol 35:249, 1997.
64. Miller WH Jr, Goldschmidt MH: Mycetoma in a cat
caused by a dermatophyte: A case report. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 22:255, 1986.
65. Moriello KA, DeBoer OJ: Fungal flora of the coat of
pet cats. Am J Vet Res 52:602, 1991.
66. Moriello KA: Management of dermatophyte infections
in catteries and multiple-cat households. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1457, 1990.
67. Moriello KA, DeBoer OJ: Fungal flora of the haircoats of cats with and without dermatophytosis.
J Med Vet Mycol 29:285, 1991.
68. Moriello KA, et al: Isolation of dermatophytes from
the haircoats of stray cats from selected animal shelters in two different geographic regions in the United
States. Vet Dermatol 5:52, 1994.
69. Moriello KA, DeBoer OJ: Efficacy of griseofulvin and
itraconazole in the treatment of experimentally induced dermatophytosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
207:439, 1995.
70. Moriello KA, et al: The prevalence of positive intradermal skin test reactions to Microsporum canis antigens in cats recovered from dermatophytosis. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 13:14, 1997.
71. Moriello KA: Treatment of feline dermatophytosis:
Revised recommendations. Feline Pract 24(3):32,
1996.
72. Moriello KA, DeBoer OJ: Environmental decontamination of Microsporum canis: In vitro studies using
isolated infected cat hair. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 309.
73. Okamoto K, et al: Drug sensitivity of Microsporum
canis isolates from dogs and cats in Kagoshima prefecture. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 47:118, 1994.
74. Okuda C, et al: Fungus invasion of human hair tissue
in tinea capitis caused by Microsporum canis: Light
and electron microscopic study. Arch Dermatol Res
281:238, 1989.
75. Papini R, Mancianti F: Extracellular enzymatic activity of Microsporum canis isolates. Mycopathologia
132:129, 1996.
76. Parker WM, Yager JA: Trichophyton dermatophytosis-a disease easily confused with pemphigus erythematosus. Can Vet J 38:502, 1997.
77. Paterson S: Miconazole/chlorhexidine shampoo as an
adjunct to systemic therapy in controlling dermatophytosis in cats. J Small Anim Pract 40:163, 1999.
78. Philpot CM, et al: Preliminary report on the isolation
of a dysgonic variety of Microsporum canis together
with the normal variety from a cattery. Mycopathologia 120:73, 1992.
79. Pinter L, et al: The value of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in the sero-diagnosis of canine

dermatophytosis due to Microsporum canis. Vet Dermatol 3:65, 1992.
80. Poisson L, et al: Subcorneal neutrophilic acantholytic
pustular dermatitis: An unusual manifestation of dermatophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceus.
In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 456.
81. Puccini S, et al: In vitro susceptibility to antimycotics
of Microsporum canis isolates from cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 201:1375, 1992.
82. Reberg SR, et al: Dermatophytosis in shelter cats in
northeastern Indiana: A survey of disease prevalence
and the influence of shelter management practices.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 15:39, 1999.
83. Reedy LM: An unusual presentation of feline dermatophytosis. Feline Pract 23(6):25, 1995.
84. Rycroft AN, McLay C: Disinfectants in the control of
small animal Iingworm due to Microsporum canis.
Vet Rec 129:239, 1991.
85. Scott OW, Hom RT Jr: Zoonotic dermatoses of dogs
and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 17:
117, 1987.
86. Scott OW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline
skin disorders seen in a university practice: Small Animal Clinic, University of Montreal, St. Hyacinthe,
Quebec (1987-1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.
87. Sidhu RK, et al: Incidence of mycotic dermatitis in
dogs. Indian Vet J 70:885, 1993.
88. Simpanya MF, Baxter M: Isolation of fungi from the
pelage of cats and dogs using the hairbrush technique. Mycopathologia 134:129, 1996.
89. Sparkes AH, et al: Epidemiological and diagnostic
features of canine and feline dermatophytosis in the
United Kingdom. Vet Rec. 133:57, 1993.
90. Sparkes AH, et al: Microsporum canis: Inapparent
carriage by cats and the viability of arthrospores.
J Small Anim Pract 35:397, 1994.
91. Sparkes AH, et al: Humoral immune responses in
cats with dermatophytosis. Am J Vet Res 54:1869,
1993.
92. Sparkes AH, et al: SDS-PAGE separation of dermatophyte antigens, and Western immunoblotting in feline
dermatophytosis. Mycopathologia 128:91, 1994.
93. Sparkes AH, et al: Acquired immunity in experimental feline Microsporum canis infection. Res Vet Sci
61:165, 1996.
94. Weitzman I, et al: A survey of dermatophytes isolated
from human patients in the United States from 1993
to 1995. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:255, 1998.
95. White-Weithers N, Medleau L: Evaluation of topical
therapies for the treatment of dermatophyte-infected
hairs from dogs and cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
250, 1995.

Candidiasis
96. Barnett JA, et al: Yeasts: Characteristics and Identification. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.
97. Bourdeau P, et al: Hyperkeratose et candidose cutanee chez un chien. Etude d'un cas. Rec Med Vet
160:803, 1984.
98. Carlotti ON, et al: Les mycoses superficielles chez Ie
chat. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 28:241, 1993.
99. Carlotti ON, Pin 0: Candida pododermatitis in the
dog: A report of 5 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:55,
1999.

418 • Fungal Skin Diseases
100. Dale JE: Canine dermatosis caused by Candida parapsilosis. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:548, 1972.
101. Greene CE, Chandler FW: Candidiasis. In: Greene
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 723.
102. Guillot J, et al: Les Candidoses des carnivores domestiques: Actualisation a propos de 10 cas. Point Vet 28:
51, 1996.
103. Ichijo S, et al: A canine case of cutaneous phyma
caused by Candida zeylanoides. Jpn J Vet Med Assoc
37:773, 1984.
104. Kral F, Uscavage JP: Cutaneous candidiasis in a dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 136:612, 1960.
105. Schwartzman RM, et al: Experimentally induced cutaneous moniliasis (Candida albicans) in the dog.
J Small Anim Pract 6:327, 1965.

Malassezia Dermatitis
105a. Aizawa T, et al: Molecular heterogeneity in clinical
isolates of Malassezia pachydermatis from dogs. Vet
Microbiol 70:67, 1999.
106. Anthony RM, et al: The application of DNA typing
methods to the study of the epidemiology of Malossezia pachydermatis. Microb Ecol Hlth Dis 7:161,
1994.
107. Bensignor E, et al: Comparaison de quatre techniques eytologiques pour la mise en evidence de Malassezia pachydermatis sur la peau du chien. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 34:33, 1999.
108. Boekhout T, Bosboom RW: Karyotyping of Molassezia yeasts: Taxonomic and epidemiological implications. System Appl Microbiol 7:146, 1994.
108a. Bond R: How might Malassezia pachydermatis cause
canine skin diseases? Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study
Group, Autumn 1999, p 41.
109. Bond R, Sant RE: The recovery of Malassezia pachydermatis from canine skin. Vet Dermatol Newsl 15:
25, 1993.
110. Bond R, et al: Use of contact plates for the quantitative culture of Malassezia pachydermatis from canine
skin. J Small Anim Pract 35:68, 1994.
111. Bond R, et al: Evaluation of a detergent scrub technique for the quantitative culture of Malassezia
pachydermatis from canine skin. Res Vet Sci 58:133,
1995.
112. Bond R, et al: Comparison of two shampoos for treatment of Malassezia pachydermatis-associated seborrhoeic dermatitis in basset hounds. J Small Anim
Pract 36:99, 1995.
113. Bond R, et al: Population sizes and frequency of Malassezia pachydermatis at skin and mucosal sites in
healthy dogs. J Small Anim Pract 36:147, 1995.
114. Bond R, Anthony RM: Characterization of markedly
lipid-dependent Malassezia pachydermatis isolates
from healthy dogs. J Appl Bacteriol 78:537, 1995.
115. Bond R, et al: Factors associated with elevated cutaneous Malassezia pachydermatis populations in dogs
with pruritic skin disease. J Small Anim Pract 37:103,
1996.
116. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Factors affecting the adherence
of Malassezia pachydermatis to canine comeocytes in
vitro. Vet Dermatol 7:49, 1996.
117. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Comparison of media and conditions of incubation for the quantitative culture of Malassezia pachydermatis from canine skin. Res Vet Sci
61:273, 1996.
118. Bond R, et al: Isolation of Malassezia sympodialis
from feline skin. J Med Vet Mycol 34:145, 1996.
119. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Evidence for carbohydrate-medi-

ated adherence of Malassezia pachydermatis to canine comeocytes in vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 530.
120. Bond R, Lloyd DH: The relationship between population sizes of Malassezia pachydermatis in healthy
dogs and in basset hounds with M. pachydermatisassociated seborrhoeic dermatitis and adherence to
canine comeocytes in vitro. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 283.
121. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Skin and mucosal populations of
Malassezia pachydermatis in healthy and seborrhoeic
basset hounds. Vet Dermatol 8:101, 1997.
122. Bond R, et al: Isolation of Malassezia sympodialis and
Malassezia globosa from healthy pet cats. Vet Rec
141:200, 1997.
123. Bond R, et al: Humoral and cell-mediated immune
responses to Malassezia pachydermatis in healthy
dogs and dogs with Malassezia dermatitis. Vet Rec
143:381, 1998.
124. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Studies on the role of carbohydrates in the adherence of Malassezia pachydermatis
to canine comeocytes in vitro. Vet Dermatol 9:105,
1998.
125. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Effect of topical therapy of Malassezia pachydermatis-associated seborrheic dermatitis on oral carriage of M. pachydermatis. Vet Rec
142:725, 1998.
126. Carlotti DN, Laffort-Dassot C: Dermatite a Molassezia chez Ie chien: Etude bibliographique et retrospective de 12 cas generalises traites par des derives azoles, Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:297, 1996.
127. Chang HJ, et al: An epidemic of Malassezia pachydermatis in an intensive care nursery associated with
colonization of health care workers' pet dogs. N Engl
J Med 338:706, 1998.
128. Coutinto SD, et al: Protein profiles of Malassezia
pachydermatis isolated from dogs. Mycopathologia
139:129, 1997.
128a. Crespo MJ, et al: Isolation of Malassezia fuifur from
a cat. J Clin Microhiol 37:1573, 1999.
129. Dufait R: Pityrosporum canis as the cause of canine
chronic dermatitis. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:
1055, 1983.
130. Dworecka-Kaszak B, et al: Evaluation of selected
physiological and morphological characteristics of Pityrosporum pachydermatis isolated from clinical cases
of otitis extema and dermatitis in dogs and cats. Arch
Vet Polon 34:3, 1994.
131. Forstervanhijfte MA, et al: Resolution of exfoliative
dermatitis and Malassezia overgrowth in a cat after
surgical thymoma resection. J Small Anim Pract 38:
451, 1997.
132. Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. J
Small Anim Pract 39:394, 1998.
133. Griffin CE: Malassezia paronychia in atopic dogs.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coll Vet Dermatol 12:51, 1996.
134. Ouaguere E, Prelaud P: Etude retrospective de 54
cas de dermite a Malassezia pachydermatis chez Ie
chien: Resultats epidemfologtques, cliniques, cytologiques et histopathologiques. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 31:309, 1996.
135. Guillot J, et al: Prevalence du genre Malassezia chez
les mammiferes. J Mycol Med 4:72, 1994.
136. Guillot J, Cueho J: The diversity of Malassezia yeasts

Fungal Skin Diseases • 419
confirmed by rRNA sequence and nuclear DNA comparisons. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 67:297, 1995.
137. Guillot J, et al: Epidemiological analysis of Malassezia
pachudermatis isolates by partial sequencing of the
large subunit ribosomal RNA. Res Vet Sci 62:22,
1997.
138. Guillot J, et al: Importance des levures du genre
Malassezia. Point Vet 29:691, 1998.
138a. Guillot I, Bond R: Malassezia pachqdermatis. A review. Med Mycol 37:295, 1999.
139. Kennis RA, et al: Quantity and distribution of Malassezia organisms on the skin of clinically normal dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1048, 1996.
140. Kieffer M, et al: Immunological reactions to Pityrosporum ovale in adult patients with atopic and seborrheic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 22:739, 1990.
141. Lloyd DH, Lamport AI: Activity of chlorhexidine
shampoos in vitro against Staphylococcus intermedius,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Malassezia pachydermatis. Vet Rec 144:536, 1999.
142. Lorenzini R, et al: In vitro sensitivity of Malassezia
spp. to various antimycotics. Drugs Exp Clin Res 11:
393, 1985.
143. Mason KY, Evans AG: Dermatitis associated with
Malassezia pachydermatis in 11 dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 27:13, 1991.
144. Mason KV, Stewart LJ: Malassezia and canine dermatitis. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds). Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology II. New York: Pergamon Press, 1993,
p 399.
145. Mathieson I, et al: Enzymatic activity of Malassezia
pachqdermatis. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 532.
146. Mauldin EA, et al: Malassezia dermatitis in the dog:
A retrospective histopathological and immunopathological study of 86 cases (1990-1995). Vet Dermatol
8:191, 1997.
146a. Midreuil F, et al: Genetic diversity in the yeast species Malassezia pachudermatis analysed by multilocus
enzyme electrophoresis. Int J Syst Bacteriol 49:1287,
1999.
147. Morris DO, Rosser EJ: Immunologic aspects of Malassezia dermatitis in patients with canine atopic dermatitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatolll:16, 1995.
148. Morris DO, et al: Type-I hypersensitivity reactions to
Malassezia pachqdermatis extracts in atopic dogs. Am
J Vet Res 59:836, 1998.
149. Nagata M, Ishidu T: Cutaneous reactivity to Malassezia pachqdermaus in dogs with seborrheic dermatitis.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 11:11, 1995.
150. Nuttall TJ: Serum specific IgG levels to cutaneous
Malassezia in normal and atopic dogs. Proc Annu
Cong Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol
14:166, 1997.
151. Plant JD, et al: Factors associated with and prevalence of high Malassezia pachqdermatis numbers on
dog skin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:879, 1992.
152. Schmidt A: In vitro activity of climbzole, clotrimazole,
and silver-sulfadiazine against isolates of Malassezia
pachudermatis. J Vet Med B 44:193, 1997.
153. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and
within noninflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from
dogs with nonneoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82:
379, 1992.
154. Scott DW: Bacteria and yeast on the surface and

within noninflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from
cats with nonneoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82:
371, 1992.
155. Vitale C, et al: Quantification of Malassezia pachydermatis obtained from skin of normal and atopic dogs.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 11:14, 1995.
156. Wagner R, Schadle S: Malassezia in 3 days old puppies. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:45, 1999.
157. White SD, et al: Comparison via cytology and culture
of carriage of Malassezia pachudermatis in atopic and
healthy dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 291.

Rhodotorula Dermatitis
158. Bourdeau P, et al: Suspicion de dermatomycose a
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa chez un chat mfecte par Ie
FeLV et Ie FIV. Rec Med Vet 168:91, 1992.

Piedra
159. Miguens MP, Ferreiros MP: Un caso de piedra
blanca en un perro. Rev Iber Micol 4:69, 1987.

Eumycotic Mycetoma
160. Allison N, et al: Eumycotic mycetoma caused by
Pseudoallescheria boydii in a dog. J. Am Vet Med
Assoc 194:797, 1989.
161. Beale KM, Pinson D: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by
two different species of Curvularia in two animals
from the same household. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
26:67, 1990.
162. Bourdeau P, et al: Pyogranulomatous panniculitis due
to Phialemonium curvatum in the dog. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 447.
163. Coyle V, et al: Canine mycetoma: A case report and
review of the literature. J Small Anim Pract 25:261,
1984.
164. Foil CS: Eumycotic mycetoma. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 738.
165. Mezza LE, Harvey HJ: Osteomyelitis associated with
maduromycotic mycetoma in the foot of a dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 21:215, 1985.
166. van den Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Eumycetoma in a
British cat. J Small Anim Pract 28:827, 1987.
Phaeohyphomycos~

167. Ajello L, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis in a dog caused
by Pseudomicrodochium suttonii. Mycotaxon 12:131,
1980.
167a. Bond R: Phaeohyphomycosis in two cats, Proc Br
Vet Dermatol Study Group, Autumn 1999, p 47.
168. Bostock DE, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Exophiala jeanselmei in a domestic cat. J Comp Pathol
92:479, 1982.
169. Dhein CR, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Alternaria altemata in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:
1101, 1988.
170. Foil CS: Phaeohyphomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 737.
171. Jang SS, et al: Feline abscesses due to Cladosporium
trichoides. Sabouraudia 15:115, 1977.
172. Kettlewell P, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Exophiala spinifera in two cats. J Med Vet Mycol 27:
257, 1989.
173. Kwochka KW, et al: Canine phaeohyphomycosis

420 • Fungal Skin Diseases
caused by Drechslera spicifera: A case report and
literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:625,
1984.
174. Lomax LG, et al: Osteolytic phaeohyphomycosis in a
German shepherd dog caused by Phialerrwnium oboeatum. J Clin Microbiol 23:987, 1986.
175. Malik R, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis caused by Exophiala jeanselmei in a cat. Aust Vet Practit 24:27, 1994.
176. McKeever PJ, et al: Chromomycosis in a cat: Successful medical therapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:533,
1983.
177. McKenzie RA, et al: Subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis caused by Moniliella suaveolens in two cats. Vet
Pathol 21:582, 1984.
178. Outerbridge CA, et al: Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat.
Can Vet J 36:629, 1995.
179. Padhye AA, et al: Xylohypha emmonsii sp. nov., a
new agent of phaeohyphomycosis. J Clin Microbiol
26:702, 1988.
180. Pukay BP, Dion WW: Feline phaeohyphomycosis:
Treatment with ketoconazole and 5-FC. Can Vet J
25:130, 1984.
181. Sousa CA, et al: Subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis
(Stemphyllium sp. and Cladosporium sp. infections) in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:673, 1984.
182. Van Steenhouse JL, et al: Subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis caused by Scolecobasidium humicola in a cat.
Mycopathologia 102:123, 1988.
183. Waurzyniak BJ, et al: Dual systemic mycosis caused
by Bipolaris spicifera and Torulopsis glabrata in a
dog. Vet Pathol 29:566, 1992.

Pythiosis and Zygomycosis
184. Bauer RW, et al: Oral conidiobolomycosis in a dog.
Vet Dermatol 8:115, 1997.
185. Bentinck-Smith J, et al: Canine pythiosis-isolation
and identification of Pythium insidiosum. J Vet Diagn
Invest 1:295, 1989.
185a. Dykstra MJ, et al: A description of cutaneous-subcutaneous pythiosis in fifteen dogs. Med Mycol 37:427,
1999.
186. English MP, Lucke VM: Phycomycosis in a dog
caused by unusual strains of Absidia corymbifera. Sabouraudia 8:126, 1970.
187. Foil CSO, et al: A report of subcutaneous pythiosis in
five dogs and a review of the etiologic agent Pythium
spp. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:959, 1984.
188. Foil CS: Oomycosis (pythiosis). In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 731.
189. Foil CS: Zygomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious
Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 734.
190. Hillier A, et al: Canine subcutaneous zygomycosis
caused by Conidiobolus sp. A case report and review
of Conidiobolus infections in other species. Vet DermatoI5:205, 1994.
191. Thomas RC, Lewis DT: Pythiosis in dogs and cats.
Compend Cont Educ 20:63, 1998.

Sporotrichosis
192. Dunstan RW, et al: Feline sporotrichosis: A report of
five cases with transmission to humans. J Am Acad
Dermatol 15:37, 1986.
193. Macdonald E, et al: Reappearance of Sporothrix
schenckii lesions after administration of Solu-Medrol
to infected cats. Sabouraudia 18:295, 1980.
194. Nogueira RHG, et al: Relato de esporotricose felina
(Sporothrix schenckii) com transmissao para 0

homem: Aspectos clfnicos, microbiol6gicos e anatomopatol6gicos. Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 47:43,
1995.
195. Rosser EJ Jr: Sporotrichosis. In: Griffin CE, et al
(eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 49.
196. Werner AH, Werner BE: Sporotrichosis in man and
animals. Int J Dermatol 33:692, 1994.

Rhinosporidiosis
197. Breitschwerdt E: Rhinosporidiosis. In: Griffin CE, et
al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 711.

Alternaria Dermatitis
198. Baumgartner W, Posselt HJ: Kutane Alternariose bei
Hunden mit unspezlfischen Dermatitiden. Kleinterpraxis 28:353, 1983.
199. Weiss R, et al: Schimmelpilzmykose beim Hund
durch Alternaria tenuissima. Kleintierpraxis 33:293,
1988.

Cryptococcosis
200. Davies C, Troy GC: Deep mycotic infections in cats.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:38, 1996.
201. Flatland B, et al: Clinical and serologic evaluation of
cats with cryptococcosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
1110, 1996.
202. Gerdes-Grogan S, Dayrell-Hurt B: Feline cryptococcosis: A retrospective evaluation. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 33:118, 1997.
203. Hansen BL: Successful treatment of severe feline
cryptococcosis with long-term high doses of ketoconazole. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:193, 1987.
204. Jacobs GJ, et al: Cryptococcal infection in cats: Factors influencing treatment, outcome, and the results
of sequential serum antigen titers in 35 cats. J Vet Int
Med 11:1, 1997.
205. Malik R, et al: Cryptococcosis in cats: Clinical and
mycological assessment of 29 cases and evaluation of
treatment using orally administered fluconazole. J
Med Vet Mycol 30:133, 1992.
206. Malik R, et al: Combination chemotherapy of canine
and feline cryptococcosis using subcutaneously administered amphotericin B. Aust Vet J 73:124, 1996.
207. Malik R, et al: Cryptococcosis in dogs: A retrospective study of 20 consecutive cases. J Med Vet Mycol
33:291, 1995.
208. Medieau L, et al: Cutaneous cryptococcosis in three
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:169, 1985.
209. Medleau L, et al: Clinical evaluation of a cryptococcal
antigen latex agglutination test for diagnosis of cryptococcosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1470, 1990.
210. Medieau L, et al: Evaluation of ketoconazole and
itraconazole for treatment of disseminated cryptococcosis in cats. Am J Vet Res 51:1454, 1990.
211. Medieau L, Barsanti JA: Cryptococcosis. In: Greene
CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 687.
212. Medieau L, et al: Itraconazole for the treatment of
cryptococcosis in cats. J Vet Int Med 9:39, 1995.
213. Mikiciuk MG, et al: Successful treatment of feline
cryptococcosis with ketoconazole and flucytosine. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:199, 1990.
214. Mitchell DH, et al: Cryptococcal disease of the CNS
in immunocompetent hosts: Influence of cryptococcal
variety on clinical manifestations and outcome. Clin
Infect Dis 20:611, 1995.
215. Noxon JO, et al: Ketoconazole therapy in canine and

Fungal Skin Diseases • 421
feline cryptococcosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:179,
1986.
216. Pentlarge VW, Martin RA: Treatment of cryptococcosis in three cats using ketoconazole. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 188:536, 1986.
217. Shaw SE: Successful treatment of 11 cases of feline
cryptococcosis. Aust Vet Pract 18:135, 1988.
218. Wilkinson GT, et al: Successful treatment of four
cases of feline cryptococcosis. J Small Anim Pract 24:
507, 1983.

Blastomycosis
219. Arceneaux KA, et al: Blastomycosis in dogs: 115 cases
(1980-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:658, 1998.
220. Cote E, et al: Blastomycoses in six dogs in New York
State. J Vet Med Assoc 210:502, 1997.
221. Cote E, et al: Possible transmission of Blastomyces
dermatitidis via culture specimen. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 210:479, 1997.
221a. Gortel K, et al: Calcinosis cutis associated with systemic blastomycosis in three dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:368, 1999.
222. Krawiec DR, et al: Use of an amphotericin B lipid
complex for treatment of blastomycosis in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 209:2073, 1996.
223. Legendre AM: Blastomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 669.
224. Legendre AM, et al: Treatment of blastomycosis with
itraconazole in 112 dogs. J Vet Int Med 10:365, 1996.
225. Rudmann DG, et al: Evaluation of risk factors for
blastomycosis in dogs: 857 cases (1980-1990). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 201:1754, 1992.

Coccidioidomycosis
226. Barsanti JA, Jeffery KL: Coccidioidomycosis. In:
Greene CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and
Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 696.
227. Greene RT, Troy GC: Coccidioidomycosis in 48 cats:
A retrospective study (1984-1993). J Vet Int Med 9:
86, 1995.

Histoplasmosis
228. Hodges RD, et al: Itraconazole for the treatment of
histoplasmosis in cats. J Vet Int Med 8:409, 1994.
229. Wolf AM: Histoplasmosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1990, p 679.

Aspergillus Dermatitis
230. Nooruddin M, et al: Cutaneous alternariosis and aspergillosis in humans, dogs, and goats in Punjab. Indian J Vet Med 6:65, 1986.
231. Sharp, N. J. H., et al: Canine nasal aspergillosis and
penicilliosis. Comp Cont Educ 13:41, 1991.

Paecilomycosis
232. Elliott GS, et al: Antemortem diagnosis of paecilomycosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:93, 1984.
233. Foil CS: Hyalohyphomycosis. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 735.
234. Littman MP, Goldschmidt MH: Systemic paecilomycosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:445, 1987.
235. Nakagawa Y, et al: A canine case of profound granulomatosis due to Paecilomyces fungus. J Vet Med Sci
58:157, 1996.
236. Patterson JM, et al: A case of disseminated paecilomycosis in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:569,
1983.
237. Rosser EJ: Cutaneous paecilomycosis in a cat. Proc

Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 15:37, 1999.

Protothecosis
238. Boyd AS, et al: Cutaneous manifestations of Prototheca infections. J Am Acad Dermatol 32:758, 1995.
239. Dechervois I, Plassiart G: Protothecose cutaneo-nasale chez un chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 33:
145, 1998.
240. Dillberger JE, et al: Protothecosis in two cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 192:1557, 1988.
241. Ginel P, et al: Cutaneous protothecosis in a dog. Vet
Rec 140:651, 1997.
242. Macartney L, et al: Cutaneous protothecosis in the
dog: First confirmed case in Britain. Vet Rec 123:494,
1988.
243. Perez J, et al: Canine cutaneous protothecosis: An
immunohistochemical analysis of the inflammatory
cellular infiltrate. J Comp Pathol 117:83, 1997.
244. Sudman MS, et al: Primary mucocutaneous protothecosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:1372, 1973.
245. Tyler DE: Protothecosis. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1990, p 742.
246. Wilkinson GT, Leong G: Protothecosis in a dog. Aust
Vet Pract 18:147, 1988.

Trichosporon Dermatitis
247. Doster AR, et al: Trichosporonosis in two cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 190:1184, 1987.
248. Greene CE, Chandler FW: Trichosporonosis. In:
Greene CE (ed). Infectious Diseases of Dogs and
Cats. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1990, p 728.
Geotrichum Dermatitis
248a. Reppas GP, Snoeck TD: Cutaneous geotrichosis in a
dog. Aust Vet J 77:547, 1999.
249. Sidhu RK, et al: Cutaneous geotrichosis in a dog and
its handler-a case report. Indian J Anim Hlth 32:1,
1993.

Antifungal Therapy
250. Boothe DM, et al: Itraconazole disposition after single oral and intravenous and multiple oral dosing in
healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 58:872, 1997.
251. Chen C: Personal communication, 1997.
252. Craig AJ, et al: Pharmacokinetics of fluconazole in
cats after intravenous and oral administration. Res
Vet Sci 57:372, 1994.
253. D'Arcy P, et al: The anti-inflammatory action of
griseofulvin in experimental animals. J Pharm Pharmacol 12:659, 1960.
254. deDoncker P, et al: Antifungal pulse therapy for onychomycosis. Arch Dermatol 132:34-41, 1996.
255. Guillot J, Chermette R: Le traitment des mycoses des
carnivores domestiques. Point Vet 28:51, 1997.
256. Gupta AK, et al: Antifungal agents: An overview: Part
I. J Am Acad Dermatol 30:677, 1994.
257. Gupta AK, et al: Antifungal agents: An overview: Part
II. J Am Acad Dermatol 30:911, 1994.
257a. Gupta AK, et al: Drug interactions with intraconazole, fluconazole, and terbinafine and their management. J Am Acad Dermatol 41:237, 1999.
258. Faergemann J: Pharmacokinetics of fluconazole in
skin and nails. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:S14, 1999.
259. Heit MC, Riviere JE: Antifungal therapy: Ketoconazole and other azole derivatives. Comp Cont Educ
21, 1995.
260. Helton KA, et al: Griseofulvin toxicity in cats: Litera-

422 • Fungal Skin Diseases
ture review and report of seven cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 22:453, 1986.
261. Hill PB, et aI: A review of systemic antifungal agents.
Vet Dermatol 6:59, 1995.
262. Kunkle GA, Meyer DJ: Toxicity of high doses of griseofulvin in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:322, 1987.
263. Mitchell F, et aI: Griseofulvin: Immunosuppressive
action. Proc Soc Exp Bioi Med 143:165, 1973.
263a. Plotnick AN: Lipid-based formulations of amphotericin B. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:838, 2000.
264. Rowan-Kelly B, et aI: Modification of polymorphonuclear leukocytes by imidazoles. Int J Immunopharmacol 6:389, 1984.
265. Scher RK: Onychomycosis: Therapeutic update. J Am
Acad Dermatol 40:S21, 1999.
266. Scott FW, et al: Teratogenesis in cats associated with
griseofulvin therapy. Teratology 11:79, 1975.
267. Shelton GH, et aI: Severe neutropenia associated with

griseofulvin therapy in cats with feline immunodeficiency virus infection. J Vet Int Med 4:317, 1990.
268. Tamaki K, et aI: Differential effect of griseofulvin on
interferon-induced HLA-DR and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression of human keratinocytes.
Br J Dermatol 127:258, 1992.
269. Vaden SL, et al: Fluconazole in cats: Pharmacokinetics following intravenous and oral administration
and penetration into cerebrospinal fluid, aqueous humour, and pulmonary epithelial lining fluid. J Vet
Pharmacol Therap 20:181, 1997.
270. Van Cutsem J, et aI: The anti-inflammatory effects of
ketoconazole. J Am Acad Dermatol 25:257, 1991.
271. Willard MD, et aI: Ketoconazole-induced changes in
selected canine hormone concentrations. Am J Vet
Res 47:2504, 1986.
272. Yamaguchi H, et aI: Immunomodulatory activity of
antifungal drugs. Ann N Y Acad Sci 685:447, 1993.

Parasitic Skin Disease

A

nimal skin is exposed to attack by many kinds of animal parasites. 1 - 10 Each species
has a particular effect on the skin; the effect can be mild, as in the case of an
isolated fly or mosquito bite, or severe, as in the case of generalized demodicosis or
canine scabies. Although the reaction of the skin to the infestation may be slight, the
common parasitisms must be considered here because the dermatologist is the logical
consultant in such cases.
When ectoparasites are vectors or intermediate hosts of bacterial, rickettsial, or parasitic diseases, they become more important than when they produce only their own effect.
A severe local or systemic reaction may result when toxins are injected into the skin (e.g.,
tick paralysis). The larvae of some parasites live in wounds or on macerated skin and
produce a condition known as myiasis. The most serious dermatologic concern occurs
when the dermatosis produced by parasites living in or on the skin produces irritation and
sensitization.
Some parasites (Cheyletiella mites and biting lice) live on the skin, subsisting on the
debris and exudates that are produced on its surface. Other parasites (fleas, sucking lice,
and ticks) live on the skin but periodically penetrate its surface to draw nourishment from
blood and tissue fluids. Still other parasites (demodectic and sarcoptic mites) live within
the skin for at least part of their life cycle, producing more severe cutaneous effects. The
reaction of the skin to these insults varies from trivial to lethal but usually includes
inflammation, edema, and an attempt to localize the foreign body, toxin, or excretory
products of the parasite. These secretions are often allergenic and cause itching and
burning sensations.

• ANTIPARASITIC AGENTS
Over the years, dozens of pesticides have been brought to the market to treat or prevent
external parasitic disorders, especially flea infestation, in companion animals. Some groups
of compounds (e.g., chlorinated hydrocarbons) were so deleterious to the environment
and wildlife that they virtually have disappeared from use. Other insecticides disappear or
remain, depending on market pressures. In the mid-90s, two new insecticides, imidacloprid and fipronil, were introduced for flea control. These products are so effective that
other agents, such as malathion, have disappeared. Environmental awareness also impacts
product availability. In the early 1990s, microencapsulated chlorpyrifos (Duratrol) was
used widely, whereas pyrethrin- and pyrethroid-based products were few in number.
Today, the microencapsulated chlorpyrifos is not available through veterinarians and pyrethrin and pyrethroid products abound. In general, the products we use today are far
safer for animals and the environment than those we used 5 years ago. Efficacy also has
increased, but methods of delivery have a great deal of impact here.
Antiparasitic agents are delivered by collar, shampoo, cream rinse, powder, spray, dip
or spot application vehicle. Some agents are delivered by mouth, injection, or transdermal
absorption. The vehicle has a direct impact on ease of use and also can influence safety.
Many antiparasitic agents would be highly toxic if applied in a vehicle that promoted
absorption or in a form that enabled the animal to ingest quantities by licking the
423

424 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
medication. Cats, because of their licking habits, are particularly susceptible to toxic
reactions with chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphate, and pyrethroid products.
It is critical that clinicians prescribe topical and environmental antiparasitic agents
within the bounds of label indications. Most insecticides are registered by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and extralabel use, either for the species
treated or in the concentration, method, or frequency of application, is illegal. Failure to
follow label indications is not condoned or allowed, and the practitioner is not protected
by the argument that it is a standard acceptable practice. Many of these products, if
improperly used, pose environmental dangers. The Food Quality Protection Act of 1996
dramatically altered pesticide regulation. Even the disposal of insecticidal products is
facing regulation, and it is possible that, as a profession, veterinarians will be severely
limited in their ability to use or prescribe, or may be required to be licensed to use, these
agents to ensure that safe practices are followed.
Amitraz, ivermectin, milbemycin, and selamectin are four drugs that are regulated by
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are commonly used to treat
external parasitic disorders of companion animals. Amitraz is licensed for generalized
demodicosis and tick control in dogs. Selamectin is licensed for prevention of heartworms
and the treatment of certain intestinal parasites, fleas, and nonfollicular mites. All other
uses are extralabel applications, which, by definition, are illegal. However, the FDA
recognizes that extralabel drug usage is necessary in companion animal medicine and
guidelines for extralabel usage have been developed by the American Veterinary Medical
Association. First and foremost, a valid veterinarian, client, and patient relationship must
exist. This requirement has greatest impact on the treatment of other animals at home
who have been exposed to the patient being examined or treated for scabies, cheyletielliosis, or otodectic mange. Ivermectin or milbemycin, commonly used agents in these
disorders, cannot legally be dispensed for animals not considered a patient of the veterinarian. Beyond the valid relationship, the guidelines indicate that if a veterinary drug
exists in the proper dosage form; is labeled for the indication; and is clinically effective,
that product should be used. If no licensed drug exists or one or more of the three
prerequisites cannot be satisfied, extralabel drug usage is appropriate.

Topical Treatments
Topical antiparasitic therapy is primarily directed against ectoparasites that feed or live on
dogs and cats. When treating the dermatosis, it is critical that the parasite; its life cycle,
epidemiology, and natural behavior; and the pathogenesis of the disease that it is causing
be considered. Topical therapy may be just one aspect of an overall treatment plan or the
sole therapy prescribed. Proper application becomes critical if it is the sole therapy.
CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS

Chlorinated hydrocarbons, which are dangerous insecticides, have become outdated and
replaced by safer products. They persist in the environment and animal tissue for long
times (for years, in some cases). Surprisingly, a lindane dip (Happy Jack Kennel Dip,
Happy Jack, Inc.) and several methoxychlor flea and tick powders are still marketed. The
authors suggest the use of safer alternatives.
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS

Two kinds of cholinesterase inhibitors are available, carbamates and organophosphates.
They were once the mainstay of insect control. However, with the advent of safer
products and better alternative treatment regimens, their use on pets is decreasing. They
are still valuable for environmental treatment in cases of infestation by fleas and other
insects or arachnids.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 425

Carbamates
Carbamates are typified by carbaryl and are safe for dogs and cats in 3% to 5% concentrations in powders and 0.5% to 2% concentrations in sprays and dips. Carbaryl should be
avoided on pets with white hair, because long-term use may tum the coat golden yellow.
Although lower concentrations may be used on kittens and puppies older than 6 weeks, it
is probably safer to use only pyrethrin until these animals are several months old.
A flea colony bred from a newly collected strain of Florida fleas was compared with
commercially available fleas (which had been reared away from the natural environment
for the past 20 years) in susceptibility to insecticides. The Florida fleas were more tolerant
to bendiocarb, malathion, and carbaryl as compared with the strain raised commercially.P
This more susceptible commercial strain was most commonly used for flea product efficacy tests in the past. Bendiocarb is a carbamate used by exterminators for premises flea
control.

Organophosphates
The most toxic insecticides in use are organophosphates. They are potent cholinesterase
inhibitors, and a cumulative effect may be seen if animals are exposed to similar insecticides in another preparation or in lawn and garden applications. None of this group
should be used on kittens, and most are also dangerous to adult cats. Malathion is
different in some respects from the rest of the group. It provides a quick insect knockdown, and it could be used carefully on adult cats. The main use of this class is for fleas
and ticks. Chlorpyrifos and phosmet are the most commonly used products.

D-L1MONENE
D- Limonene is a volatile citrus oil extract used in some botanical flea control products. Its
insecticidal properties appear to be desiccant in nature because epicuticular oils are
removed. Efficacy is poorly defined, and adverse reactions have been seen in dogs and
cats."

FIPRONIL
Fipronil is a new insecticide and acaricide in the phenylprazole class." It acts as an
antagonist at the insect oy-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor. Fipronil is marketed in a
spray (Frontline, Merial) or spot application product (Frontline Top Spot, Merial) for flea
control in dogs and cats. Its efficacy in nonfollicular mite and lice infestations also has
been demonstrated.

FORMAMIDINES
These newly formulated acaricidal agents act by inhibition of monoamine oxidase. They
are also prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors and a-adrenergic agonists. Amitraz (Mitaban,
Upjohn & Pharmacia), the veterinary form, is available as a rinse and a collar for tick
control. In the United States and Canada, the rinse is licensed for use only in the
treatment of generalized demodicosis in the dog at a concentration of 250 ppm with an
application rate of every 14 days. It is also effective in the treatment of feline de modicosis, Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Sarcoptes, and Notoedres. The drug is unstable and rapidly
oxidizes on exposure to air and sunlight, so it is important not to use expired product or
parts of a bottle exposed to the air for long periods. Oxidized product may have increased
toxicity. The collar formulation is of no use in treating demodicosis.v"
Its other actions include a-adrenergic agonist and prostaglandin inhibition. Side effects of treatment often include transient sedation and pruritus, hypothermia, bradycardia,
hypotension, and hyperglycemia (use with caution in animals with diabetes mellitus). The
vehicle, xylene, is thought to contribute to toxicity problems.F" 45 Amitraz dips are used at
different strengths and frequencies in various parts of the world.

426 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

INSECT GROWTH REGULATORS

Insect growth regulators (IGRs) can be divided into two types: (1) juvenile hormone
analogs (juvenoids) and (2) chitin synthesis inhibitors. Juvenile hormones are natural
chemicals in insects that control early stages of their metabolism, morphogenesis, and
reproduction." Final maturation and pupation of flea larvae proceed only in the presence
of appropriate levels or absence of the juvenile. hormone for that stage of larval growth.
Methoprene, fenoxycarb, and pyriproxyfen are the available topical agents (juvenoids) with
biochemical activities that mimic those of the natural juvenile hormone. Application to the
premises by spray or fogger prevents maturation of pupal fleas if they are exposed to it.
Duration of action depends on the agent used and its concentration, but 6- to 12-month
control can be expected." Methoprene is sensitive to ultraviolet light, so that it has little
value outdoors. A problem with these products is the difficulty in delivering the product
deep into rugs, cracks, and recessed places where the larvae are developing. Environmentally applied juvenoids do not affect the adult flea, so that complete results (flea-free
outcome) are delayed for several weeks. This is corrected by simultaneous spraying or
mixing with insecticides that kill adult fleas: Juvenoids can be applied directly to the
environment or indirectly by on-animal applications. In the on-animal application mode,
the juvenoid is incorporated into a collar, spray, or spot application product and covers the
animal's body. During feeding, the flea is exposed to the agent and eggs layed are exposed
to high levels before they falloff the host into the environment. These eggs do not
hatch. 33• 307 Adult fleas exposed continuously to pyriproxyfen die of internal organ damage
after 5 to 10 days of exposure."
IMIDACLOPRID

Imidacloprid is a new insecticide of the chloronicotinyl nitroguanidine class.264 It binds to
the flea's nicotinic receptor on the postsynaptic neuron and blocks impulse transmission. It
is available in a spot application product (Advantage, Bayer) for dogs and cats. Imidacloprid is also effective against lice.
PYRETHRINS

Pyrethrin is a volatile oil extract of the chrysanthemum flower. It contains six active
pyrethrins that are contact poisons and have a fast knockdown action and flushing action
on insects but no residual activity. It is rapidly inactivated by ultraviolet light. Pyrethrins,
because of their low toxicity, rapid inactivation, and lack of tissue residue and buildup, are
relatively environmentally safe, although they are still toxic to fish and bees. For clients
concerned with chemicals, the use of pyrethrins may be more acceptable, because this is
an organic natural insecticide.
There is no cholinesterase suppression. Pyrethrin demonstrates a rapid kill but low
toxicity, and the low concentration of 0.06% to 0.4% is effective if it is synergized with
0.1% to 2% piperonyl butoxide, which forms a stable complex with cytochrome P450, thus
limiting the metabolism of pyrethrins in insects. Cats may develop central nervous system
(CNS) signs in response to piperonyl butoxide, but otherwise toxicity is low. Pyrethrins are
effective against fleas, Otodectes, flies, lice, and mosquitos. Effective use for fleas usually
necessitates daily application as a spray or a rinse unless microencapsulators or ultraviolet
light stabilizers are added to the formulation.
PYRETHROIDS

These synthesized chemicals are modeled after pyrethrin and include D-trans-allethrin,
bioallethrin, resmethrin, tetramethrin, deltamethrin, fenvalerate, and permethrin. The
LD 50 varies with the agent selected.P In action and toxicity, they are relatively comparable, although not identical, to pyrethrin. They produce a quick kill that is improved by the
addition of a synergist and pyrethrin. Some of the early pyrethroids degrade on exposure
to ultraviolet light, so there is little or no residual activity. The new pyrethroids are
relatively photostable compared with pyrethrin.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 427

One of the most popular pyrethroid agents is permethrin, which is found in numerous
products with a wide variety of delivery systems. Part of permethrin's desirability is its low
toxicity (except in cats, so only limited low-concentration formulas are approved in this
species), relative stability on exposure to ultraviolet light, and potential for use as a
repellent. As with pyrethrins, the synthetic pyrethroids are often combined with other
active agents, particularly repellents.

REPELLENTS
Although these chemicals are capable of keeping insects away, they need frequent application-often, every few hours depending on temperature, humidity, the density of insects,
the movement of the animal, and the drying effect of the wind. For control of fleas, some
products only need daily or alternate-day application. Spray repellents are the primary
form for flea control because large areas must be treated frequently. Compounds with
repellent action include pyrethrin, permethrin, citronella, diethyltoluamide (DEET),
ethohexadiol, dimethyl phthalate, butoxypropylene glycol, MGK-264, and ingredients in
Skin-Sa-Soft (Avon) bath oil (some believe that the fragrance is the effective ingredient).14· 17 Amitraz has been effective in repelling ticks and is available in a tick collar
formulation.

ROTENONE
Rotenone, which is a natural organic compound, is derived from the root of the Derris
plant. It is similar to pyrethrins in having low toxicity, rapid action, and quick degradation.
It is available mixed with pyrethrin for use as a rinse or a shampoo for dogs and cats
(Durakyl, DVM Pharmaceuticals) and is used in some products that are safe for puppies
and kittens.

SULFUR
With the emphasis on newer, more effective drugs, it is sometimes forgotten that sulfur
and its derivatives are excellent and safe parasiticides. The commercial lime sulfur solution
(LymDyp, DVM Pharmaceuticals) is safe for dogs and cats; is an inexpensive effective
treatment of infestations of nonfollicular mites; and is fungicidal, bactericidal, keratolytic,
and antipruritic. A 28% lotion (Happy Jack Mange Medicine, Happy Jack, Inc.) and 10%
sulfur ointment USP are other forms of sulfur medications. These high concentration
products can be irritating.
Sulfur is a natural parasiticide that is relatively nontoxic and environmentally safe. Its
major drawback is the foul odor. It also stains jewelry and temporarily discolors hair,
especially white hair. It is drying but only rarely irritating when used at a 2% concentration. A 2% to 5% lime sulfur solution is effective against Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Cheyletiella, chiggers, fur mites, and lice. Contrary to common belief, sulfur is not an effective
flea repellent, either topically or systemically.

Systemic Antiparasitic Agents
A variety of oral, topical, or parenterally given products are available that produce either
blood levels or cutaneous levels of the active agents. The advantages of these products are
their relative ease of administration and the certainty of their reaching the whole body.
The diffuse and certain distribution make this type of product especially valuable in
eliminating parasites in long-coated animals. The disadvantages are the relative risks and
the use of the parasitic poisons internally to kill ectoparasite infestations. There is also the
risk of additive toxicity if the pet is exposed to other topical insecticides. Another potential
difficulty is the duration of the effective blood levels between treatments. Fortunately, the
newer generations of systemic parasiticidal agents are not similar to the poisons of the
past.

428 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
The use of systemic agents should be approached with knowledge regarding the
parasite to be treated and, most importantly, the biology of the parasite. For example,
feeding habits of the parasite may influence efficacy. Female fleas, because they ingest
large quantities of blood, are more effectively killed by cythioate than are male fleas.
Systemic agents are particularly valuable in treating obligate parasites such as Sarcoptes,
Notoedres, Cheyletiella, and Derrwdex mites. They are valuable as adjunctive therapy for
nonobligate parasites, such as fleas, because they are generally not effective as a sole
therapeutic agent. The mechanism of action of the drug, the route of parasitic exposure,
the duration of effective tissue or exposure levels, and the biology of the parasite must all
be considered when using systemic antiparasitic agents.

SYSTEMIC ORGANOPHOSPHATES
Two organophosphates, cythioate and fenthion, received wide usage in flea control programs. 7 Cythioate was given orally twice weekly to dogs at 3 mglkg and cats at 1.5 mglkg
(extralabel usage in the United States). Fenthion was marketed for dogs with a topical
application rate of 8 mglkg every 14 days. Although it was applied topically, the fenthion
was absorbed transdermally and killed fleas when they fed on treated blood. Although
both products showed some efficacy, both have been withdrawn from the market in the
United States and receive little use elsewhere.

SYSTEMIC ENDECTOCIDES
These parasiticides were developed from macrocyclic lactones produced by the fermentation of various actinomycetes.v 7. 44 This class of drugs includes avermectins (ivermectin,
doramectin, abamectin, selamectin) and milbemycins (milbemycin, moxidectin). At
present, the two products used in veterinary dermatology are ivermectin and milbemycin
but preliminary studies suggest that all of these products may have some efficacy. Both at
least partly act by potentiating the release and effects of GABA. GABA is a peripheral
neurotransmitter in susceptible nematodes, arachnids, and insects. Avermectins and milbemycins are also agonists of glutamate-gated chloride channels. In mammals, GABA is
limited to the CNS. Because these drugs do not cross the blood-brain barrier in most
adult animals, they are relatively safe and have a wide margin between efficacy and
mammalian toxicity. In general, these drugs are effective for nematodes, microfilaria, lice,
fur mites, Otodectes, Sarcoptes, Notoedres, Cheyletiella, and Demodex.
Ivermectin, milbemycin, and moxidectin are licensed for use orally every 30 days at
0.625 ,uglkg, 0.5 mglkg, and 3 ,uglkg, respectively, for the prevention of dirofilariasis. At
this dosage, no adverse side effects are seen in dogs of any breeding. In treating external
parasites, ivermectin is administered at 200 to 600 ,uglkg daily, weekly, or bimonthly and
toxic side effects can be seen. Milbemycin is administered at 1 to 2 mglkg daily or weekly,
and toxic side effects, although rare, have been reported. Selamectin is a novel new
avermectin that has been shown to be efficacious for the treatment of fleas,314 ear mites,
scabies, ticks, some intestinal nematodes, and prevention of heartworms. It is applied
topically and absorbed systemically, with efficacy for fleas and heartworms shown with
once-monthly dosing for both dogs and cats.
High-dose ivermectin or milbemycin can be toxic to dogs younger than 3 months of
age and to adult dogs within certain breeds. Breeds widely reported to be sensitive to
high-dose ivermectin include the collie, Old English sheep dog, Australian shepherd,
Shetland sheepdog, and crosses thereof. 246 Individual reports of an adverse reaction in a
border collie, West Highland White terrier, German shepherd dog, and Samoyed can be
found. 36 Toxic side effects are neurologic in origin and include mydriasis, hypersalivation,
lethargy, ataxia, tremors, coma, and death. Ivermectin-sensitive collies lack adequate quantities of P-glycoprotein necessary to successfully exclude ivermectin from the brain. lOa In
breeds very sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, for example, the collie, one dose of more
than 125 ,uglkg can produce coma. In less sensitive individuals, side effects may not be
seen for days to weeks. To try to identify individuals sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, an

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 429

increasing dosage schedule has been proposed.v For the first 5 days of treatment, the dog
is given 50, 100, 150, 200 and 300 JLglkg of ivermectin, respectively. If the dog is highly
sensitive to high-dose ivermectin, subtle neurologic signs, for example, lethargy, ataxia,
should develop within 24 hours of the administration of the sensitizing dosage. If the drug
is discontinued immediately, the dog should return to normal within 24 to 48 hours.
Because some dogs do not develop these signs for weeks, the owner should always
observe the dog carefully.
Collies sensitive to high-dose ivermectin also are sensitive to high-dose milbemycin
when the dosage exceeds 5 mglkg.44 Cross sensitivity to doramectin and moxidectin
remains untested but should be expected. High-dose milbemycin has been used to treat
hundreds of dogs with demodicosis and scabies, and neurologic side effects have not been
reported, even in ivermectin-sensitive breeds, with dosages below 3 mglkg. In a recent
study of 70 dogs with nasal mite infestation, milbemycin was given weekly for three
consecutive weeks at dosages of 0.5 to 1.0 mglkg. ll6 Sixteen dogs had side effects. In 12,
one or more episodes of vomiting or diarrhea, or both, occurred. Two dogs seemed
lethargic, one was uncoordinated, and the last dog's sneezing worsened with treatment.
The dosage used did not seem to influence the frequency of side effects, and a breed
frequency was not reported. All dogs return to normal within 48 hours of drug withdrawal. When moxidectin was given to ivermectin-sensitive collies, no toxicity was seen
with 15 JLglkg monthly. lOa However, when it was given at 90 JLglkg, mild signs of toxicity
were seen.
Ivermectin

Ivermectin (Ivomec, Merial) is a derivative of avermectin B from fermentation products of
Streptomyces avermitilis. This drug is noted for activity against nematodes, microfilaria,
and Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella, Notoedres, and Otodectes mites. Although ivermectin was not
shown to be efficacious for Demodex with the treatment protocols that had been effective
for other ectoparasites (e.g., 0.2 to 0.4 mglkg, orally or subcutaneously, weekly for up to 8
weeks), it can be effective when it is administered orally daily. Ivermectin does not affect
trematodes and cestodes, because GABA is not involved in neurotransmission in those
species. Parasite paralysis is the main action of ivermectin, but it also suppresses reproduction. Ticks are not killed, but their egg production and molting are suppressed.
Ivermectin can be given parenterally, orally, or topically with good absorption. Ivermectin is rapidly absorbed orally and persists in the tissues for prolonged periods. This is
important because it does not have a rapid killing effect on susceptible parasites. Dosages
used to treat all nonfollicular mites range from 0.2 to 0.5 mglkg. If given by injection or
applied topically, two doses at 14-day intervals should be sufficient. Orally, the drug is
given three times at weekly intervals." In rare cases, additional doses may be needed.
Ivermectin also has apparent anti-inflammatory properties. The authors have seen
many dogs, whose ultimate dermatologic diagnosis was atopy, food hypersensitivity, or
bacterial pyoderma, that had marked reduction in pruritus or decreased visible inflammation for 3 to 7 days after receiving ivermectin. Ivermectin has been shown to have
immunomodulatory effects, especially at the level of T cells, in mice but this does not
appear to be true in the dog.5 . 23
Ivermectin toxicosis is rare in cats (usually seen in kittens), develops within 1 to 12
hours after administration of the drug, and is characterized by abnormal behavior, ataxia,
lethargy, weakness, recumbency, apparent blindness, coma, and death.
Milbemycin

Milbemycin (Interceptor, Novartis) is derived from fermentation products of Streptomyces
hygroscopicus .l78 , 246 It is similar to ivermectin in activity with the notable addition of
efficacy in the control of various intestinal parasites. Milbemycin has been used only in
dogs to treat nasal mites, scabies, or generalized demodicosis. No adverse reactions have
been reported in ivermectin sensitive breeds when doses of 1 to 2 mglkg were given so it
receives widest usage in these dogs. In demodicosis, it is given daily, whereas it is given

430 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
every seventh day for 3 to 5 treatments in the other disorders. In some dogs, live scabies
mites can be found after three treatments, suggesting that more frequent administration
might be needed in some cases.
Moxidectin

Moxidectin (Proheart, Fort Dodge) is derived from fermentation products of Streptomyces
cyaneogriseus subsp. noncyanogenus.lOa It is marketed for heartworm prevention in the
United States. Moxidectin (Cydectin, Fort Dodge) is also licensed in cattle for the treatment and control of various nematodes, Hypoderma spp., mites, lice, and hom flies.
Although it is not approved for this use, moxidectin has been given orally or subcutaneously at 0.2 to 0.4 mglkg for the successful treatment of Octodectes infestations and
generalized canine demodicosis.
Doramectin

Doramectin (Dectomax, Pfizer) is derived from fermentation of selected strains of Streptomyces avermitilis. In the United States it is marketed for the treatment and control of
various nematodes, mites, and lice in cattle and swine. Although not approved for this use,
doramectin has been given subcutaneously at 0.2 to 0.3 mglkg for the successful treatment
of feline and canine scabies.
Selamectin

Selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer) is the first FDA-approved topically applied product that
prevents heartworm disease, kills adult fleas, and prevents their eggs from hatching and
treats and controls ear mites in dogs and cats.43a• 314 It also treats and controls canine
scabies and Dermacentor variabilis infestations in dogs.43 a Selamectin is a novel semisynthetic avermectin produced by a new strain of Streptomyces avermitilis. Following topical
application, selamectin is identified in sebaceous glands, hair follicles, and basal layers of
the epithelium. It is applied topically, at a dose of 6 to 12 mglkg, at the base of the neck
in front of the shoulder blades, every 30 days. When used according to the manufacturer's
directions, selamectin is safe in ivermectin-sensitive dogs, in breeding animals, and in
puppies and kittens 6 weeks of age or 0lder. 43b Occasional local reactions (inflammation,
alopecia) are seen following topical application of selamectin.

INSECT DEVELOPMENT INHIBITORS
These products are basically IGRs given by mouth or injection. Fleas feeding on treated
blood lay eggs that do not hatch or develop beyond the larval stage. Larvae feeding on the
feces of treated fleas also will not develop. The most widely marketed product, lufenuron
(Program, Novartis), is given by mouth once monthly to dogs or cats or by injection every
6 months to cats. 15. 21. 26. 43 Lufenuron is a benzyl-phenol urea compound that inhibits
chitin synthesis. Chitin is a major component of the flea exoskeleton but is not found in
mammals. With altered chitin synthesis, embryogenesis and hatching does not occur.
Cyromazine is another oral flea development inhibitor. It belongs to the triazine
group of compounds. It does not inhibit chitin synthesis but increases its stiffness so the
exoskeleton cannot expand. The internal pressure in the larvae increases and results in
lethal body wall defects.P Because the drug must be given daily, it has not received wide
usage.

NEONICOTINOIDS
These agents act at the nicotinic acetyl-choline receptor. Nitenpyram is a novel, orally
administered flea adulticide.w However, it is rapidly eliminated from dogs after oral
administration, and is lethal to fleas only for 24 to 48 hours.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 431

• HELMINTH PARASITES

Ancylostoma and Uncinaria (Hookworm) Dermatitis
The larvae of Ancylostoma braziliense, A. caninum, and Uncinaria stenocephala cause a
characteristic skin lesion in humans that is called creeping eruption. The skin lesions that
these larvae produce in dogs or cats are not as severe, because these animals are their
specific hosts." The skin lesions are often incidental to completion of the normal life cycle
of the parasite, with the larvae quicldy abandoning the skin and proceeding to other parts
of the body. Although percutaneous entry can lead to completion of the life cycle, larvae
penetrating by this route rarely mature. The larvae are present on the grass and in the soil
of runs and paddocks during the spring and summer in cool climates, and animals exposed
to them become infected. Thus, the disease is essentially one of kenneled dogs on grass or
earth runs that have poor sanitation.
Cutaneous lesions seem to be more prevalent in areas with predominant infection
with V. stenocephala (Ireland, parts of England, and the United States), although animals
with ancylostomiasis may also have skin lesions. V. stenocephala produces a marked
dermatitis on skin penetration but rarely completes its life cycle by this route. It is
insignificant as a blood sucker compared with A. braziliense or A. caninumr" A. caninun
can complete its life cycle via skin penetration.
Hookworm dermatitis has been produced by natural and experimental infestations
with V. stenocephala. With both types of infection, similar clinical and histologic lesions
were produced. The third-stage larvae enter the dog's skin on areas of the body that
frequently contact the ground. They enter primarily at an area of desquamation on the
skin, although a few larvae may use hair follicles. The larvae enter the horny layer parallel
to the skin surface, and there is little evidence of enzymatic activity. The larvae are
thought simply to exert pressure by undulating activity, the forward movement being
achieved by pushing back against rigid keratinized cells. This route follows the line of least
resistance through the outer layers.'? After they penetrate the epidermis, the dermis
appears to cause little hindrance to the migrating larvae. After larvae pass through tissue,
the cells reunite and there is little lasting evidence of their passage.f" Some other species
of hookworm larvae cause loss of integrity of the epidermis as they penetrate it.
Clinical signs of hookworm dermatitis are initially red papules on the parts of the
body in frequent contact with the ground. Later, these areas become uniformly erythematous and then thickened and alopecic. The feet are especially affected (Fig. 6-1). However, the skin of the sternum, ventral abdomen, posteromedial thighs, and tail may also be
involved. Skin over the bony prominences of the elbows, hocks, and ischial tuberosities
may have more obvious lesions owing to the thickened skin and hair loss. The interdigital
webs may be erythematous, and the feet may be swollen, painful, and hot. The footpads
become spongy and soft, especially at the pad margins, where the tissue can be readily
grooved and often stripped from the underlying dermis. Chronically inflamed foot pads
become variably hyperkeratotic (Fig. 6-2). The chronic inflammation causes the claws to
grow rapidly and to appear deformed. The claws may be friable and may break off,
leaving thick, tapered stumps. Arthritis of the interphalangeal joints may be present, too.
Pruritus is a constant finding but varies in its intensity.
Histopathologic examination reveals varying degrees of perivascular dermatitis (hyperplastic or spongiotic) with eosinophils and neutrophils. The epidermis may contain recent
larval migration tracts, which may occasionally be traced into the dermis as linear tracts of
neutrophils and eosinophils. Larvae are rarely found but, if present, are surrounded by
clusters of neutrophils, eosinophils, and mononuclear cells. Hypersensitivity has been
suggested as a cause of the lesions.
Diagnosis can be made with reasonable certainty by the clinical signs, a positive fecal
examination finding of hookworm eggs, and a history of poor housing and sanitation.
Differential diagnosis may be complicated by a coincidental infection with hookworms.
Differential diagnostic possibilities include demodectic mange, contact dermatitis, Pelodera
dermatitis, and intradermal penetration by parasites such as Strongyloides and schistosomal agents.

432 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-1. Hookworm dermatitis. A Siberian husky confined to a dirt-based run and
affected with A. caninum shows lesions of chronic hookworm dermatitis on all four feet. There
is alopecia, erythema, swelling. and crusting.

Treatment should emphasize cleaning of the premises, frequent removal of feces, and
generally improved hygiene, combined with appropriate routine anthelmintic treatment
and prophylaxis of all dogs in the kennel. Routine use of heartworm preventatives helps
minimize the frequency of this disorder. Dry, paved runs, or periodic treatment of dirt or
gravel runs with 4.5 kg (10 lb) of borax per 30 m2 (100 ft2) of run may be helpful, but
borax or salt kills vegetation. Attention to measures designed to improve foot health are
important. Claws should be kept trimmed short to improve foot conformation and help to
alleviate joint stress. The paws should be kept clean and dry. Exercising dogs on new
clean pasture is beneficial.

Pelodera Dermatitis
Pelodera dermatitis (rhabditic dermatitis) is a local erythematous, nonseasonal pruritic
dermatitis caused by a cutaneous infestation with the larvae of Pelodera strongyloides. 2 • 10
Under filthy conditions, the larvae of the free-living nematode P. strongyloides may
invade the skin of dogs. The adult parasites have a direct life cycle and live in damp soil
or decaying organic material, such as rice hulls, straw, and marsh hay that has been stored
in contact with the ground for many months. The larvae may invade the skin of animals
that comes in contact with contaminated soil or hay.'? The larvae are about 600 /-Lm long
(Fig. 6-3) and may be found in skin scrapings from affected skin or in the associated
bedding. In histologic sections, larvae and some parthenogenetic female nematodes may
be found in the hair follicles where a typical folliculitis is present.
Pasyk'" described Pelodera dermatitis in an Ll-year-old girl who slept with a pet dog
with the condition. The larvae invaded the epidermis and hair follicles, and the inflammatory infiltrate of mononuclear and eosinophilic cells surrounded necrotic hair follicles and
extended to capillaries and venules of the upper dermis. It was noted that the child might
have contracted the infestation from the dog, but it seems more reasonable that both
individuals were infested from the same environmental source. Smith and colleagues'"
reported that human skin infections with larval nematodes can be contracted from dogs
with A. braziliense, A. caninum, U. stenocephala, Gnathostoma spinigerum, and Strongyloides stercoralis, as well as P. strongyloides.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 435

FIGURE 6-4. A, Ventral chest and abdomen of a beagle with Pelodera dermatitis. The involved areas are
alopecic and erythematous. B, Close-up view of the skin of the patient in A, showing intense erythema, multiple
papules, and alopecia. C, Tick bite. Note the erythematous nodule with a tick attached. D, Tick infestation.
Pododermatitis in a dog with numerous interdigital ticks. E, Dracunculiasis. Nodular lesion in the axillary region
with an emerging adult. F, Acanthocheilonema infection. Ulcerated nodular lesions on the head. (Courtesy A.
Hargis.) G, Dark brown, waxy exudate and crusts in the ear of a dog with Otodectes cynotis. (Courtesy R. L.
Collinson.) H, Erythema and excoriation of pinna and temporal region in a cat with 0. cynotis.

436 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-5. Pelodera dermatitis in a dog. Numerous nematodes within hair follicle.

Anatrichosomiasis
Anatrichosomiasis is a type of larval migrans caused by the nematode Anatrichosoma
cutaneum; which produces blisters on the hands and feet of monkeys and humans in
Africa. A case caused by an Anatrichosoma sp. worm was reported in a 13-year-old South
African cat." The cat was presented for lameness with necrosis, sloughing, and ulceration
of the footpads of all four feet. Treatment was not attempted, and the cat was euthanized.
Histopathologic findings included superficial perivascular dermatitis with numerous worms
and bioperculate eggs located in necrotic migratory tracts within the epidermis (Fig. 6-6).
Female worms averaging 42 mm in length were identified as Anatrichosoma Sp.8
A female, 5-month-old Boxer was found to be passing double-operculate eggs in its
feces. Similar eggs were obtained from skin scrapings taken from a raised, flaking, erythematous nodule on the dorsal midline in the lumbar region. The nodule was removed
surgically, and the eggs from the scraping and the nematode segments found in histologic
sections were identified as an Anatrichosoma Sp.54

Schistosomiasis
Schistosoma cercariae of ducks, shore birds, voles, mice, or muskrat (natural hosts) penetrate the skin of humans, or other warm-blooded animals that are abnormal hosts, and
produce a pruritic dermatitis (Schistosoma dermatitis).
Schistosome eggs are shed in the feces of the natural host. The miracidia hatch within
20 minutes and must either find a mollusk (snail) host within 12 hours or die. They form
sporocysts in the mollusk and hatch in 4 weeks as cercaria. These are shed into water but
die in 24 hours unless they reach a warm-blooded natural host. In the natural host, they
go to the liver and the intestinal wall, where eggs are laid and passed in the feces." These
parasites are trematodes: Trichobilharzia ocellata, T. stagnicolae, and T. physellae infest
waterfowl of the Great Lakes area, whereas Austrobilharzia variglandis affects ducks and
terns in Florida and Hawaii." In humans, the condition has been called swimmers' itch,
clam diggers' itch, and rice paddy itch. These conditions occur because the cercariae
penetrate the skin of the abnormal host and produce clinical disease. Although skin
exposed to infested bodies of water from spring to fall may become infected, animals are

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 433

FIGURE 6-2. Digital hyperkeratosis due to
hookworm (Uncinaria stenocephala) pododermatitis.
(Courtesy K. Thoday.)

Clinical features of Pelodera dermatitis include a distribution of skin lesions that
typically involves areas that contact the ground - feet, legs, perineum, lower abdomen and
chest, and tail (Fig. 6-4A).48, 49 The affected skin is erythematous and partially to completely alopecic, Multiple papules later develop to crusts, scales, and secondary infection
from the constant scratching (see Fig, 6-4B). Pruritus varies from mild to intense,
Diagnosis is by skin scrapings, which readily reveal small, motile nematode larvae (625
to 650 }Lm in length), Larvae and adults can also be identified in contaminated litter by
using the Baermann technique." The history of contaminated bedding and pruritus,
together with the skin scraping findings, should be diagnostic, but the differential diagnostic possibilities include hookworm dermatitis, dirofilariasis, and strongyloidiasis (all on the
basis of the larval findings). Grossly, skin lesions may suggest contact dermatitis, bacterial
folliculitis, demodicosis, or scabies,
Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furunculosis (Fig,
6-5), Nematode segments are present within hair follicles and dermal pyogranulomas.
Eosinophils are numerous,
Treatment is simple and effective. Complete removal and destruction of bedding are
mandatory. Beds, kennels, or cages should be thoroughly washed and sprayed with an
insecticide. The bedding should be replaced with cedar or other wood shavings, cloth, or
shredded paper. The patient should be bathed with a warm water shampoo to soften and
remove crusts and then with a parasiticidal dip, as for scabies. This procedure usually
results in prompt relief of itching and rapid healing. Although repeated parasiticidal dips
have been recommended in the past, it is highly unlikely that they are necessary.w
Prednisolone may be given for a few days to help to stop the pruritus; systemic antibiotics

434 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-3. A, Larva of the free-living nematode Pelodera strongyloides. (Courtesy J.
Georgi.) B, Larva of P. strongyloides: be, buccal capsule; es, esophagus; nr, nerve ring; is,
isthmus; eb, esophageal bulb; in, intestine. (From Willers WB: Pelodera strongyloides in association with canine dermatitis in Wisconsin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:319, 1970.)

may be indicated for any secondary pyoderma. The infestation is self-limited and resolves
spontaneously after the animals are removed from the source of contamination.

Strongyloides stercoralis-Iike Infection
In a Single report, an apparently rare cutaneous manifestation of S. stercoralis infection
was reported in 5 of 10 Boston terriers in a kennel. 52 Three weeks after a new pup was
placed in the kennel, 6-month-old puppies developed mucoid, blood-flecked feces; anemia; general lymphadenopathy; and focal dermatitis. The hair was rough, dull, and dry,
and crusted lesions of 1 cm in diameter were on the tail, distal hindlegs, the ventral trunk,
and other areas with ground contact. Some pups had a severe, hemorrhagic pododermatitis. The dogs were housed in outdoor pens with concrete and shaded grassy areas. Fecal
samples contained large embryonated and unembryonated ova (80 by 35 JLm) and firststage larvae (200 JLm). The ova were larger than those of S. stercoralis (normally 55 by 32
JLm), and this parasite usually sheds only first-stage larvae in the feces. When feces were
cultured for 18 hours, free-living adults and third-stage larvae were produced.
Treatment with thiabendazole.P 11.4 mglkg once daily orally for 5 days, or ivermectin,53 200 to 500 JLglkg orally, can be effective, but retreatments may be necessary.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 437

FIGURE 6-6. Anatrichosomiasis. Nematode segments within the epidermis of a eat's
footpad.

more apt to be swimming and the cercariae are much more numerous in the water on
bright warm days of midsummer; thus, infection is most common then.
At the time of penetration, the cercariae produce macules and wheals that last 15 to
20 hours. These later develop into papules and, after 2 to 4 days, into vesicles. These
stages are intensely pruritic. They are often confused with mosquito, chigger, or flea bites.
Healing takes place in 5 to 7 days, because the cercariae are walled off by an acute
inflammatory reaction, with infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and eosinophils, Some
humans with the condition have only one strong reaction and on subsequent exposures
seem immune, but most people experience increasingly severe reactions on each reexposure.
Local treatment of the skin is not effective, except with palliative antipruritic lotions.
Control measures should primarily emphasize staying out of the water. Actions such as
removing water vegetation that encourages snail populations or killing the mollusks by
adding dilute copper sulfate solution to small ponds are of limited value. The authors are
not aware of documented cases of canine schistosomiasis in the literature but have seen
dogs that had signs and a history suggestive of the problem.

Dracunculiasis
Dracunculus insignis is a parasite of dogs and wild carnivores of North America. 58• 6o D.
medinensis (guinea worm) affects humans, cats, and other animals in Asia and Africa.t" D.
insignis has been reported to affect the dog, raccoon, mink, fox, otter, and skunk/" The
intermediate host is a Cyclops (a crustacean) that is ingested from contaminated water by
the host. The larvae develop in the host during a period of 8 to 12 months. The adults
develop in the subcutaneous tissue of the abdomen and limbs. Usually, a nodule forms,
and eventually, a fistula develops (Fig. 6-7). Just before the fistula opens, the host may
show urticaria, itching, and a slight fever. When the host enters cool water, the female
worm is stimulated to release larvae (Fig. 6-8), which escape through the cutaneous
fistula. Some larvae may enter the blood, but they can be distinguished from Dirofilaria
and Dipetalonema larvae by their long tapered tails. One can also apply cold water to the
fistula to stimulate the female worm and then make a smear of the exudate to identify the
larvae.

438 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-7. Dracunculiasis. Nematode segments in an abscess.

Clinical features are chronic, single to multiple nodules on the limbs, the head, or the
abdomen that eventually ulcerate and do not heal (see Fig. 6-4E). The lesions are often
painful and pruritic. The adult parasites (female, 1.7 mm wide by 70 em long; male, 1.7
mm by 22 em) may occasionally be seen in fistulae. Exfoliative cytologic study may reveal
neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages as well as larvae (about 500 }Lm length). Histologic examination of an excised lesion reveals a nodular-to-diffuse dermatitis containing
adult and larval nematodes surrounded by fibrosis and eosinophilic pyogranulomatous
inflammation. 57. 60

FIGURE 6-8. Dracunculiasis. Multiple larvae collected from the nodule shown in Figure 6-4£.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 439

Individual lesions may be removed surgically, or the worm may be removed gently by
carefully winding it up on a stick during a period of several days. With multiple lesions,
treatment is more difficult and may not be effective. Although there are reports on the
efficacy of diethylcarbamazine, thiabendazole, metronidazole, nitridazole, and ivermectin in
the treatment of dracunculiasis, treatment is not uniformly successful.P 57. 60
Control measures depend on decontaminating water supplies. With time, the incidence of disease decreases and the disease dies out. Dracunculiasis can be prevented also
by drinking only water that is passed through a fine filter.

Dirofilariasis
Adults of Dirofilaria immitis live in the heart, and larvae are found in the blood and
occasionally in the subcutaneous tissues. Adult worms can rarely be found in abscess-like
lesions in the skin, especially on the legs.8 , 62, 63 The microfilaria rarely cause skin disease.
Although pustular eruptions, ulcerative dermatitis, and scabies-like dermatitis have been
associated with dirofilariasis.Fv'" the cause-and-effect relationship was not well established
in those cases. A pruritic papulonodular dermatitis has been proved to be associated with
these larvae and probably results from a hypersensitivity to the larvae (see Chap. 8).64-66
Dogs with cutaneous dirofilariasis (heartworm dermatitis) typically have a chronic,
pruritic dermatitis with ulcerated papules, nodules, and plaques. Lesions are most commonly found on the head or the limbs but can be seen anywhere. Response to antibiotics,
topical agents, sedatives, and glucocorticoids is poor.
Peripheral eosinophilia and a positive Knott's test for microfilaria are common findings, but lesions can occur in dogs with occult filariasis." Histopathologic examination
revealed varying degrees of angiocentric pyogranulomatous dermatitis. Microfilarial segments were present intravascularly and extravascularly within the granulomatous dermal
nodules. Eosinophils varied in number from few to numerous. Many of the blood vessels
in the central areas of the lesions contained microfilariae, but none of the deep dermal or
subcutaneous vessels outside the lesions showed cellular infiltrates or microfilariae. Immunohistochemical staining shows positive immunoreaction of the microfilariae with antiimmunoglobulin G (IgG) serum.P'
With standard heartworm treatments, the lesions become nonpruritic within 2 weeks
and heal completely within 8 weeks.

Other Filarial Infections
A large number of filarial nematodes are found worldwide. The adults reside in subcutaneous tissues, whereas microfilariae circulate in the blood. Typically, no disease is caused
by either life stage, but the microfilariae can be confused with those of D. immitis. Ocular
onchocerciasis has been reported in dogs from the western United States.?? Adult worms
and larvae were found within the pyogranulomatous mass and were either causal or
coincidental. Nodular lesions and various nonspecific skin changes (e.g., pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis, especially over the caudal half of the body) have been associated with
Dirofilaria repens 6 1, 69, 72, 344 and other filarial nematodes/" It is not clear whether the
parasites induced the dermatitis or were a coincidental finding in some pre-existing skin
disease. Because the clinical findings were similar to those seen in filarial dermatitis in
other species (e.g., equine onchocerciasis), the nematode is probably causal. In addition,
adulticidal (arsenical) and microfilaricidal (ivermectin) therapy cures the dermatoses associated with D. repens.T"
Ten dogs from the western United States were described with a novel filarial infection.?' All dogs had singular or multiple, typically pruritic, papules or plaques with alopecia, scarring, erythema, ulceration, and crusting. The head (see Fig. 6-4F), neck, shoulder
region, and back were most commonly affected. On biopsy, a perivascular-to-interstitial
dermatitis with plasma cells and eosinophils was seen. In most dogs, dermal microgranulomas surrounding microfilariae (Fig. 6-9) are observed. In one dog, an Acanthocheilonema
sp. adult was isolated and this nematode is suspected as the causal agent in all dogs.

440 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-9. Acanthocheilonema infection. Granulomatous reaction around microfilaria in the
dermis. (Courtesy A. Hargis.)

Ivermectin administration (0.2 to 0.3 mglkg) every 14th day for 3 doses results in rapid
clinical improvement.

Miscellaneous Helminthic Infections
Parasitology textbooks I. 10 list hundreds of trematodes, cestodes, and nematodes of domestic and feral animals. Because pets are frequently bitten by the insect vectors for the
various parasites or ingest the parasite by eating the natural host or some intermediate
stage (e.g., dracunculiasis), aberrant infection can occur and probably is more common
than reported. In the unnatural host, the parasite may complete its life cycle if the natural
and new hosts are similar (e.g., dog and fox) or may die or encyst in an abnormal site,
often the skin. Taenia crassiceps and other cystocercoids can be found coincidentally in
stray dogs or cats'" and can be found in skin lesions in dogs (Figs. 6-10 and 6-11) ,75-77
With multiple lesions, treatment with praziquantel at 100 mglkglday for 15 days has been
reported to be effective. Subcutaneous abscesses have been reported in dogs with Paragonimus kellicotti,81 Habronema Spp.,83 Gnathostoma spinigerum,74 and Lagoduiascaris
majorl" and in cats with Lagochilascaris major (Fig. 6-12)73.79 or Gordius robustusi" If
there is systemic involvement, the parasite should be identified specifically so that an
appropriate parasiticide can be selected. When the parasite has encysted in the skin or the
subcutis, the wound should heal with removal of the parasite and good wound care .

• ARTHROPOD PARASITES
Arachnids
Arachnids differ from insects in the absence of wings, the presence of four pairs of legs in
adults, and fusion of the head and the thorax. I. 10 With ticks and mites, the head, the
thorax, and the abdomen are fused so that they have lost their external signs of segmentation. The mouthparts and their base together are called the gnathostoma, or capitulum.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 441

FIGURE 6- 10. Taenia crassiceps infection. Two large
abscesses on the body wall of a dog. (Courtesy R. Chermette.)

FIGURE 6- II. Taenia crassiceps infection. Fluid drained from the masses shown in Figure 6-10
contained many ovoid, transparent vesicles 1 to 5 mm in diameter. (Courtesy R. Chennette.)

442 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-12. Lagochilascaris
major infection. Ruptured abscess
with draining tract. (Courtesy A.
Dell'Porto.)

The rest of the parasite consists of fused elements of the head along with the thorax and
abdomen, together called the idiosoma. There are separate sexes.

PARASITIC TICKS
Ticks differ from mites in their larger size, the hairless or short-haired leathery body, the
exposed armed hypostoma, and the presence of a pair of spiracles near the coxae of the
fourth pair of legs. Most ticks are not host specific. Ticks are divided into argasid, or soft,
ticks and ixodid, or hard, ticks. The argasid ticks are more primitive and less often
parasitic, produce fewer progeny, and infest the premises occupied by their hosts. Ixodid
ticks are more specialized and highly parasitic, produce more progeny, and infest the open
country frequented by their hosts.'

Argasid (Soft) Ticks
Argasid ticks are more commonly parasites of birds and are found frequently in warmer
climates. In regions where they are endemic, they may infest all types of wild and
domestic animals. They have no dorsal plate, the sexes are similar, the capitulum is not
visible dorsally, and the spiracles lie in front of the third pair of unspurred coxae. Ticks of
this class seldom travel far from their lairs and are often nocturnal feeders. Only one
species is discussed .
• Spinous Ear Tick. Otobius megnini is found in the external ear canal of dogs and
cats. Its range is limited to the southern and western United States. The larvae and
nymphs infest the ear canal of the host, producing acute otitis externa, pain, and occasional convulsions. Asymptomatic infection also can be seen. 89 Often, the ear canals
become packed with immature ticks, but in some cases, only a few are found. Adults are
fiddle shaped with a constriction in the middle, but they are not spiny and do not feed
because they are not parasitic. Adults can live 6 to 12 months in a protected environment
and lay 500 to 600 eggs. Eggs hatch in days, and larvae typically feed immediately but can
survive unfed for 2 to 4 months. The larvae, engorged on lymph from the ear canal, are
yellow or pink. They are about 0.3 em and spherical, with three pairs of minute legs.
After 5 to 10 days of feeding, they develop into nymphs. The nymphs, which also inhabit

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 443

the ear canal, are bluish gray with four pairs of yellow legs (Fig. 6-13). They are widest
in the middle, and the skin has numerous sharp spines. The nymphs feed for 1 to 7
months before molting to adults.
Damage from spinous ear ticks results from the loss of blood and lymph. In addition,
severe irritation and secondary otitis cause vigorous head shaking and scratching. Treatment involves mechanically removing ticks with forceps, spraying or dipping the coat with
insecticidal materials such as pyrethroids and malathion, and treating the otitis externa.
Otic treatments with an oil base may smother and kill some ticks.89
Reinfestation is a problem, so destruction of the lairs or nests of the ticks is important. Spraying the sheds, grounds, woodpiles, and other homesites with malathion or
chlorpyrifos may be effective. An amitraz tick collar (Preventic, Virbac) may prevent
reinfestation.
Ixodid (Hard) Ticks

Hard ticks possess a chitinous shield, the scutum, which covers the dorsal surface of the
male and the anterior dorsal part of the female tick. The capitulum is visible dorsally at
the anterior end, and its base is important taxonomically. The sexes are dissimilar, although both are bloodsuckers. It is beyond the scope of this text to identify ticks
specifically, but because Rhipicephalus sanguineus (in comparison with Dermacentor) can
reproduce easily in buildings and thus presents special control problems, a few key
features for identifying genera are described (Fig. 6-14).
Rhipicephalus is recognized by the vase-shaped base of the capitulum, by elongated
spiracles, and by triangular adanal plates in the male tick. The fourth coxae are no larger
than the other three. Dermacentor ticks are characterized by the large fourth coxae, the
rectangular base of the capitulum, and the ornate scutum.
The general life cycle of ixodid ticks is similar, although each species may vary slightly
in some details. Eggs hatch in 2 to 7 weeks. Larvae feed for 3 to 12 days and then drop
from the host for 6 to 90 days before molting. Nymphs also feed for a short period (3 to
10 days) before an extended, off-host rest (17 to 100 days). Adults are hardy (up to a 19month life span) and prolific, with egg lays of 2000 to 8000. Generally, completion of the
life cycle necessitates three hosts, preferably animals of varied size, for the larva, nymph,
and adult, although some species pass through all stages on the same mammal. If the
complicated life cycle is interrupted, the tick can survive for long periods or hibernate
through the winter. Although the life cycle is usually completed in a single year, it may
extend for 2 or 3 years.
While off the host, these ticks infest ground that is covered with small bushes and
shrubs. They resist cold but are susceptible to strong sunlight, desiccation, and excessive
rainfall. They require a moist environment.

Common Species of Ixodid Ticks Affeaing Dogs and Cats
• Rhipicephalus sanguineus. The brown dog tick is widely distributed in North America and causes the primary tick problem in many sections of the United States. It

FIGURE 6-13. Nymph of Otobius megnini, the spinous ear tick. (From
Lapage G: Monnig's Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology, 5th ed. Williams
& Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1962.)

444 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
!--~r--Copitulum
..-r-:)I",~e,..,..--Genital pore

""CJ.:::<:E5"~{;~~~=-l:: Pregenital plate
~"r.i!~~!IE"~Genital plate

\ra~~;-COxo IV

~~~'- Genital groove

"""''--'--''---- Coxa IV
Spirocle
Genital groove
Epimerel plate

~ "o=o-n-Spi rode
·t-rt/&''-+-.!H'">''- Anal plote

'--7'---H-Anal groove

Anus

Anal groove

A

';--~-Adonal

plate

RHIPICEPHALUS SANGUINEU5

C

IXODES RICINUS

FIGURE 6-14. Ventral view of various species of
male ixodid ticks, showing genital and anal grooves,
coxae, and plates. Differential characteristics are indicated by heavy lines and dotted areas. (From Belding
DL: Textbook of Parasitology. Appleton-Century-Crofts,
New York, 1965; redrawn from Hegner, Root, Augustine, and Huff: Parasitology, Appleton-Century Company, 1938.)

B

DERMACENTOR ANDER.SONI

can survive indoors, owing to its low moisture requirements, and can complete its
life cycle with only one animal as host. Although its principal host is the dog, it is
found on other canine species, cats, rabbits, horses, and humans. It requires three
distinct hosts (but perhaps the same animal) in its life cycle. It can transmit
babesiosis and anaplasmosis, Ehrlichia canis and Francisella tularensis infection, and
can cause tick paralysis.
• Dermacentor variabilis. The American dog tick is also widely distributed in North
America but is especially common along the Atlantic coast in areas of shrub and
beach grass. The principal host of the adult tick is the dog, but humans, domestic
animals, and large fur-bearing mammals may be attacked. The principal host of the
immature tick is the field mouse, but other small rodents or larger mammals may
be infested. It spreads Rocky Mountain spotted fever, St. Louis encephalitis, tularemia, and anaplasmosis, and causes tick paralysis.

Other Ticks That May Affect Dogs and Cats
These include Dermacentor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick), Dermacentor occulentalis (Pacific or West Coast tick), Ixodes scapularis (black-legged tick), Ixodes dammini
(deer tick), and Amblyomma maculatum (Lone Star tick).
Damage From Ticks

Ticks injure animals by causing irritation via their bites; by producing hypersensitivity
reactions (see Chap. 8); by serving as vectors for bacterial, rickettsial, viral, and protozoal
diseases; and by producing tick paralysis through their poisonous secretions (see Fig.
6-4C and D).
Tick paralysis has been produced by 12 ixodid species, including D. variabilis, and is
seen in many hosts including dogs and cats." The paralysis is caused by a protein toxin
produced by the salivary glands of the tick. It may be elaborated by ovarian function,
because it is associated with egg production. Individual ticks vary in their toxin-producing
capacity, although those attached near the spine and neck seem to produce a more severe
intoxication. The toxin affects the lower motor neurons of the spinal cord and cranial
nerves, and produces a progressive ascending flaccid paralysis.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 445

Treatment and Control of Ticks
In cases of tick paralysis, rapid recovery follows mechanical removal of the complete tick
or ticks. When animals are infested by small numbers of ticks, manual removal from the
host is simple and easy. An effective method is to soak the tick in alcohol, grasp the head
parts at the surface of the skin gently with a 5-inch curved Crile mosquito hemostat, and
apply firm traction. Ticks are commonly found in the ears and between the toes. The
collected ticks should be soaked in alcohol or an insecticide until dead.
For heavy or recurrent infestations, dogs can be treated with fipronil or have permethrin applied as a spray, dip, or spot treatment.lv 39, 84, 88 Frequent treatment is needed
for maximum efficacy. Cats can be treated with fipronil or iverrnectin.s" 88 The amitraz
tick collar for dogs is reported to be highly effective in detaching or preventing the
attachment of ticks. 86 Although an amitraz-impregnated collar and a spot-on fipronil both
killed ticks and inhibited attachment and feeding, the amitraz collar had a longer duration
of effect and reduced egg hatchability and percentages of surviving and feeding larvae. 86a
Selamectin was effective in controlling D. variabilis when administered monthly.f"
Immunotherapy with a tick vaccine to overcome a tick-induced immunosuppression,
with its subsequent larger number of ticks, has been proposed.w
Infestations of R. sanguineus in houses and kennels can often be controlled or
eliminated by repeated spraying of woodwork, crawl spaces, pipe clearances, and cracks
with chlorpyrifos. For severe infestations, professional exterminators should be employed.
Outdoor control measures are usually impractical but can help limit the number of
ticks. Their habitat can be destroyed by cutting and burning brush and grass, by cultivating land, and by rotating pastures. In urban areas, grass and shrubbed areas can be
treated with appropriately registered pesticides. Application is done in the spring and
repeated once during midsummer.

PARASITIC MITES
Mites are members of the order Acarina. I, 10 They are smaller than ticks and do not have
a leathery covering; the hypostome may be unarmed, and some mites have spiracles on
the cephalothorax. Parasitic mites are chiefly ectoparasites of the skin, mucous membranes, or feathers, but a few are endoparasites. They are distributed worldwide, are
found on plants and animals, cause direct injury to animals, and spread disease. Because
of their prevalence and clinical importance, four parasitic mites-Cheyletiella spp., Demodex spp., Sarcoptes scabiei (var. canis), and Notoedres cati-and the diseases they cause
are discussed in depth.
Most disorders discussed subsequently can be effectively treated with topical pesticides or oral or parenteral avermectins (ivermectin and milbemycin). At present, the
avermectins are licensed in dogs and cats for monthly administration at low dosages. Their
acaricidal dosages are much higher (ivermectin: 200 to 600 JLg!kg; milbemycin: 1 to 2 mg!
kg). Use at these doses is an extralabel drug use and should not be considered unless no
licensed product exists, the licensed products cannot be used because of animal idiosyncrasies, or the licensed product is not effective. Casual use could subject the veterinarian
to legal action, especially if the animal had an adverse reaction.
Dermanyssus gallinae

This mite attacks poultry (poultry mite), wild and cage birds, dogs, and cats, as well as
humans. It is called the red mite, but it is red only when engorged with blood. At other
times, it is white, gray, or black. The engorged adult, which is the largest form, is only 1.1
mm in size (Fig. 6-15). It lives in nests and cracks in cages or houses. After a meal of
blood, it lays up to seven eggs at a time. They hatch to six-legged nymphs that do not
feed. After 24 ± 12 hours, these molt to eight-legged protonymphs that feed and molt, 30
± 15 hours later, to deutonymphs. These also feed and molt 30 ± 15 hours later to
adults. The whole cycle takes only 8 days under ideal conditions, but without feeding

446 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-1 S. Dermanyssus gallinae
(Degeer). Left, dorsal view of female;
right, ventral view of female. (From Lapage G: Monnig's Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology, 5th ed. Williams &
Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1962.)

opportunities, it may last 5 months.P- Mites survive for up to 9 months without food when
kept at 5° to 25°CYOa
This mite affects dogs and cats only rarely and almost accidentally.?? Wild birds
nesting in the eaves of houses have mites, which may enter open windows and affect
people and animals living there. Ramsay and Mason'" found such large numbers of mites
covering a dog's body that the small grayish white mites crawling on the hair resembled
the "walking" dandruff of cheyletiellosis. In that case, itching was not severe. Most cases
occur in pets that have access to chicken houses or live in recently converted poultry
quarters. Clinical signs include erythema and papulocrustous, intensely pruritic eruptions,
especially over the back and the extremities. Diagnosis is made by finding the mites in
skin scrapings. Almost any insecticidal bath, dip, or spray eliminates the mites. The
affected premises that initiated the infection should be treated to prevent reinfestation.
Because -20°C and temperatures >45°C were lethal for D. gallinae, freezing, heating, or
both could be advocated as alternatives to chemical sanitation.P'"

Lynxacarus radovsky
The small cat fur mites are common in Australia, Hawaii, and Brazil'< 96 and have been
reported in Florida." and Texas.P' They have elongated bodies, 430 to 520 p.,m in length,
and flaplike sternal extensions. These contain the first two legs, which grasp the hair of
the host (Fig. 6-16). All of the legs have terminal suckers. Because all fur mites are
generally alike, a competent parasitologist is needed for accurate species identification.
These mites are not highly contagious and infection typically occurs by direct contact, but
fomites may be important for transmission." Bowman'< reported only 1 of 14 cats in a
group to be affected. Severity of clinical signs relates to the chronicity and extent of the
infestation. In mild cases, there is little itching and the mites attached to the hair give a
salt-and-pepper appearance to the dull and dirty coat. Because hairs epilate easily, some
patchy alopecia can be seen. In severe cases, there is a generalized maculopapular to
exfoliative dermatitis. Severely involved cats tend to be more pruritic. Mites usually
congregate along the topline attached to the terminal parts of the hair. However, they
may occasionally be found allover the body. Diagnosis is made by isolation of mites on
skin scrapings or acetate tape impression. Treatment with insecticidal sprays or dips, lime
sulfur dips weekly, or ivermectin is usually adequate.P" 96
T rombiculosis

Although 20 of about 700 species of chigger mites (harvest mites) can cause disease, only
two are reported here.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 447

FIGURE 6-16. A, Lynxacarus
radovsky, female in ventral view:
se, sternal extensions; g, genitalia.
Body length, 515 ps«. B, L. radoosky, male in ventral view: g, genitalia; s, sucker; gd, genital disc. Body
length, 430 ps«. (From Bowman
WL, Damrow R: The cat-fur mite
in Australia. Aust Vet J 54:403,
1978. Photographs by R. Wilson.)

Eutrombicula (Trombicula) alfreddugesi (North American Chigger) and
Neotrombicula (Trombicula) autumnalis
The adult form is a scavenger living on decaying vegetable material. It is orange red, is
about the size of the head of a pin, and lives about 10 months, producing probably one
generation per year. The eggs are laid in moist ground and hatch to six-legged red larvae
that are parasitic and feed on animals. They drop to the ground and become nymphs, and
finally adults (Figs. 6-17 and 6-18). The entire cycle is complete in .50 to 70 days, but
adult female mites may live longer than a year. They are usually found in areas where the
skin is in contact with the ground, such as the legs, the feet, the head, the ears, and the
ventrum. Signs are variable. The bite usually produces severe irritation and an intensely
pruritic papulocrustous eruption (Fig. 6-19B), but it may also cause nonpruritic papules,

FIGURE 6-17. A, Trombicula alfreddugesi
(North American chigger) adult; B, T. alfreddugesi larva, dorsal view (legs omitted).
(From Belding DL: Textbook of Parasitology.
Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1965.)

X 20

XIOO

448 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-18. Neotromhicula autumnalis. (Courtesy J. Georgi.)

pustules, and crusts. Secondary scaling and alopecia may appear. Mites may be found in
and around the ears of cats but are easily distinguished from Otodectes (ear mites) by
their intense orange-red color (see Fig. 6-19C) and their tight adherence to the skin.97. 98
They are about 500 /-tm in size. When removed from the host for microscopic examination, they should be placed in mineral oil immediately or they will escape.
Chiggers are seasonal in late summer and fall. Affected patients have a history of
environmental contact in woods and fields. Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis (spongiotic or hyperplastic) in which eosinophils are numerous.
Treatment is successful with one or two parasiticidal dips or topical otic preparations
containing a parasiticide (Tresaderm, Merck AgVet).98 Systemic corticosteroids administered for 2 to 3 days help relieve the itching, if present. Unless rural animals are
prevented from roaming, reinfestation can be expected. In one study, the application of a
0.25% fipronil spray blocked reinfestation in 15 of the 18 treated dogs. lO O The three
treated cats were reinfested within 7 to 10 days. Others have also had success with the
topical application of fipronil. 96a

Walchia americana
This chigger mite (Fig. 6-20) has been reported to be common in squirrels and small
rodents in the southwestern and eastern United States and has been reported in the cat. 99
The larvae live on the surface of the skin. Their salivary secretions allow them to feed on
tissue liquids of the host. A walled-off channel is formed on the skin surface as a host
reaction that attempts to isolate the parasite. The larvae detach and enter decaying wood
for a quiet period. Active nymphs emerge and forage, become quiet again as they pass
through the imagochrysalis stage, and then emerge as adults. These feed principally on
the Collembolla insect (spring tail). The adults lay many eggs, which hatch to parasitic
larvae. Some chiggers have a special liking for certain body locations on the host. The
mite prefers the ventrum but is also found on the ears and the back.
In the cat reported by Lowenstine and colleagues." the lesions were on the ventral
trunk, the medial surface of the legs, and the interdigital spaces. Lesions could be
palpated, but the hair needed to be parted carefully to see them easily. There was nodular
thickened skin, and the surface was cracked and scaly, with moist, serous yellow exudate.
The paws were swollen, and the claws were cracked. The cat shook its feet as if it had
stepped into something noxious. Close inspection revealed nonpruritic papules (0.1 to 0.3

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 449

FIGURE 6-19. A, Self-induced hypotrichosis in a cat with Otodectes cynotis. B, Papules on the medial elbow
of a dog due to chigger bites. C, Orange chigger mites on a crust in the temporal region of a cat. (Courtesy T.
Manning.) D, Scaling over the dorsum of a cat with cheyletiellosis. (Cat is lying on its side on a green towel.) E,
Cheyletiella infestation in dog. The white specks are walking dandruff. F, Papular urticaria of human skin due to
Cheyletiella blakei bites. G, Localized demodicosis. A single alopecic patch at the commissure of the lips. H,
Periocular alopecia and erythema in a dog with localized demodicosis.

450 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-20. Walchia americana. (Courtesy J.
Georgi.)

cm) with a few wheals and flares. Skin scrapes produced few mites, but a skin biopsy
specimen contained many mites.
Histopathologic examination reveals varying degrees of intraepidermal pustular to
vesicular dermatitis. Hyperkeratosis is marked, and mite segments are seen within the
epidermis (Fig. 6-21). Eosinophils and mast cells are numerous.
Treatment with insecticidal products for the mites and broad-spectrum antibiotics for
the secondary infection produces a good response in 10 days.

Otodectes cynotis
O. cynotis (ear mite) is a psoroptid mite that does not burrow but lives on the surface of
the skin. Adult mites are large and white and move freely. The anus is terminal, they have
four pairs of legs, and all except the rudimentary fourth pair of the female mite extend
beyond the body margin. All legs of the male mite bear short, unjointed stalks (pedicles)
with suckers, which are also present on the first two pairs of legs of the females.

FIGURE 6-21. Walchia americana larva buried in the epidermis
of a cat.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 4SI

FIGURE 6-22. Larger male 0.
cynotis mite approaching a deutonymph.

The life cycle lasts 3 weeks. The egg is laid with a cement that sticks it to the
substrate. After a 4-day incubation, it hatches to produce the six-legged larva. At this
point, the larva feeds actively for 3 to 10 days, rests for 10 to 30 hours, and hatches to the
protonymph, which has eight legs, although the last pair are small. After a simple active
and resting stage, the protonymph molts into the deutonymph. The deutonymph is usually
approached by the male adult (Fig. 6-22), and the two become attached (end to end) by
the pair of dorsal posterior suckers on the body of the nymph and those on the rear legs
of the adult male mite. If a male adult is produced from the deutonymph, the attachment
has no physiologic significance; however, if a female mite emerges, copulation occurs at
that moment, and the female mite becomes egg bearing. Female mites that are not
attached, and thereby do not permit copulation at the moment of ecdysis, do not lay eggs.
Sexual dimorphism occurs only in the adult form. The first four legs of all stages bear
unjointed, short stalks and suckers, but only the adult male mites have suckers on the rear
legs. Adults have approximately a 2-month life span.
The mites feed on epidermal debris and tissue fluid from the superficial epidermis. In
this way, the host is exposed to, and immunized against, mite antigen. 107, 110 There is no
delayed hypersensitivity, but a reaginic antibody develops early in the disease and precipitating antibodies later in its course,
As the mites feed, the epithelium of the ear canal is irritated and the canal fills with
cerumen, blood, and mite debris, This discharge has the classic coffee grounds appearance
(see Fig. 6-4G). Clinical symptoms are variable, especially in cats. Some cats with massive
amounts of discharge show no clinical signs, whereas other cats have intense otic pruritus
with minimal discharge (see Fig. 6-4H). Dogs tend to have otic pruritus with minimal
discharge. Lesions may be restricted to the external ear canal, but mites are commonly
found on other areas of the body, especially on the neck, rump, and tail." 101 These
ectopic mites often cause no disease, but some animals have a pruritic dermatitis, which
can resemble flea bite hypersensitivity, atopy, or food hypersensitivity (see Figs.
6-23 and 6-19A). Dogs and cats that have 0. cynotis infestations often have positive
intradermal skin test reactions to other mites: Dermatophagoides farinae, D. pteronyssinus, and Acarus siro. 10la , 107a These reactions become negative after the 0. cynotis infestation is eliminated. Other conditions to be ruled out include pediculosis, Pelodera dermatitis, scabies, and chigger bites. Ear mites are highly contagious and especially prevalent in
the young. The mites are not host specific," so all contact animals should be presumed to
be infected. Mites can cause a transient papular dermatitis in humansl?' or rarely become
a true otic parasite.l'"

452 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-23. Otodectic mange.
Dog with severe generalized disease.

Various treatment options exist, and selection depends on the number of animals
involved and the severity of the clinical signs. With only one or two animals involved, the
otic route of treatment is used. If the ear canals are filled with debris, they should be
cleaned with an appropriate ceruminolytic agent. The mite infestation can be addressed
with one of many otic parasiticides, baby oil, a neomycin sulfate-thiabendazole-dexamethasone solution (Tresaderm), or various steroid-antibiotic-antifungal ear products.l'< 106. lOB
The thiabendazole in Tresaderm is thought to have both ovicidal and adulticidal activity.
The products containing no parasiticide are thought to work by smothering the mite. lOB
Animals with severe otic pruritus or secondary bacterial or yeast infections usually are
treated with the polypharmaceutical agents. Specific instructions depend on the product
used. Because all stages beyond the egg should be susceptible to the agent, treatment
should only be needed for 7 to 10 days unless there is a secondary infection. With this
short course of treatment, body treatment with an appropriate flea spray, foam, or dip is
necessary to prevent reinfestation of the ear canal by the ectopic mites.P"
In multiple animal situations, cases with skin disease, or when otic products cannot or
will not be used, ivermectin can effectively eradicate the mites.v 101 Although aural
administration is commonly used, relapses can be seen because of the irregularities in
drug absorption.J'" Near 100% efficacy is seen with oral (weekly for three doses), subcutaneous (two doses at 14-day intervals), or topical (pour-on product-two doses at 14-day
intervals) administration. Although no data are available, high-dose milbemycin should be
effective in animals sensitive to high-dose ivermectin. Moxidectin (0.2 mglkg) was given
orally or subcutaneously, twice at a lO-day interval, with excellent tolerance and efficacy.107a The spot application form of fipronil also is effective.P? Others indicate that the
application of 2 to 4 drops of the fipronil spot-on product in both ears, repeated in 10 to
30 days, is effective.P'< 101b. lOlc Selamectin (2 treatments at a 30-day interval) was very
effective for the treatment of Otodectes infestations in cats and dogs. 43a

Pneumonyssoides caninum
P. caninum is a mite of unknown incidence.'!" In one study, the mite was found in 7% of
dogs undergOing necropsy for unrelated reasons.v- It inhabits the nasal passages and
sinuses of dogs, and most infested dogs are asymptomatic. When signs result, they include
serous to catarrhal rhinitis-sinusitis, sneezing, reverse sneezing, excessive lacrimation, and
other signs that could be confused with those of respiratory allergy.u5 The aerophagia
associated with the respiratory signs predisposes the dog to gastric dilatation-volvulus.l'?

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 453

Some dogs have facial pruritus. 114. 118 Diagnosis is by mite identification grossly1l4 at
rhinoscopy or in nasal flushes. The mites may be impossible to demonstrate in some dogs,
and response to acaricidal therapy allows a presumptive diagnosis to be made. The only
effective treatments are ivermectin or milbemycin. 111, 116
Environmental Mites

Many species of free-living mites can be found in grains, in hay and straw, and in the
house. These mites can cause skin disease by accidental parasitism on mammals-'? or by
the induction of allergic reactions when the exoskeletons, body parts, or excreta are
ingested, absorbed percutaneously, or inhaled.': 120 The latter methods are most important,
especially with D. pteronyssinus and D. farinae, the two most common species of house
dust mites. Dogs with an atopy-like condition (see Chap. 8) often show positive reactions
to these mites, but the absolute significance of those reactions is uncertain.
Environmental mites may be susceptible to parasiticides used in flea control programs, but the natural habitat of these mites makes their eradication difficult. Hay and
straw mite problems can be resolved by removing the hay and straw or by using fresh
straw, which should contain the natural foodstuffs of these mites.'!" Food storage mites
can be eliminated only by destroying the food. House dust mite populations can be
decreased by removal of carpets and frequent and thorough vacuuming of floors, furniture, and bedding. These cleaning procedures may help but do not completely resolve the
pet's problem because the basis for the dermatitis is allergy and not direct parasitism.
Cheyletiellosis

Cheyletiella dermatitis (walking dandruff) is usually a mild, nonsuppurative mite-induced
dermatitis produced by Cheyletiella spp. living on the surface of the skin.

Cause and Pathogenesis
Cheyletiella mites are large mites that affect cats, dogs, rabbits, and humans.P' The
incidence of the disease is unknown because signs are so variable, but it is probably less
prevalent now because of the widespread use of flea control products, which also kill this
mite. The three species of mites may travel freely among various host species." 35,122,127 In
general, Cheyletiella yasguri is considered the species found in dogs 123; C. blakei, the
species in cats 126; and C. parasitivorax, the species in rabbits. Experimental transfer of C.
yasguri between dogs and rabbits suggests that the various species do not have extreme
host speciflcity.P" All species can transiently affect contact humans.l'"
The large mites (385 /Lm) have four pairs of legs bearing combs instead of claws (Fig.
6-24). The most diagnostic feature of Cheyletiella spp. is the accessory mouthparts or
palpi that terminate in prominent hooks (Fig. 6-25). The heart-shaped sensory organ on
genu I is diagnostic of C. yasguri, the cone-shaped sensory organ is diagnostic of C.
blakei, and the global sensory organ is diagnostic of C. parasitivorax.
Free-living cheyletids (e.g., Cheyletus eruditis) can also infest cats and dogs. 125 These
mites are not reported to produce clinical signs. The free-living cheyletids must be
differentiated from Cheyletiella mites, which they closely resemble. In the free-living
cheyletids, the palptarus bears one or two combs.P"
The mites do not usually burrow but live in the keratin layer of the epidermis and are
not associated with hair follicles. They move about rapidly in pseudotunnels in epidermal
debris but periodically attach themselves firmly to the epidermis, pierce the skin with
their stylet chelicerae, and become engorged with a clear colorless fluid. The ova are
smaller than louse nits and are attached to hairs by fine fibrillar strands. In contrast, louse
eggs are cemented firmly to the host's hairs (see Fig. 2-28Z).
Cheyletiella mites are not predacious on other mites. The entire life cycle is completed on one host and goes through the typical egg, larval, nymphal, and adult stages.
The life cycle is approximately 21 days. The mite is an obligate parasite, because larvae,
nymphs, and adult male mites are thought to die soon after leaving the host. Adult female
mites are more hardy and may live free of their host for up to 10 days or more." 122, 127

454 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

B

A

FIGURE 6-24. Artist's sketch of adult female Ch etie a yasguri mite, showing characteristic saddleshaped body and diagnostic hooks of the accessory mouthparts. Insert A shows the heart-shaped sense
organ on genu I that typifies Cheyletiella yasguri. Insert B shows the conical sense organ on genu I that
typifies Cheyletiella blakei. Insert C shows the global sense organ on genu I that typifies Cheyletiella
parasitivorax.

Eggs that are shed into the environment with the pet's hair may be important sources of
reinfestation." Stein 132 reported seeing Cheyletiella mites crawling in and out of the
nostrils of cats and thus added a new twist to the epidemiology and therapy of the
disease.
The mites are highly contagious, especially between young host animals, and humans
may be affected, too. Both dogs and cats may be a source of human infection.P' In one
survey, 27 of 41 catteries that had problems with a pruritic dermatitis had animals with
cheyletiellosis.P" In 20% of these situations, humans cases were also found. C. blakei was
isolated in all cases. There is no doubt that the public health aspects of this parasite are
important, because frequent contact with infected animals may produce an uncomfortable
skin disease in humans. Human infestations vary in severity, but after direct contact with
infested animals has occurred, grouped, erythematous macules form on the arms, the
trunk, and the buttocks (see Fig. 6-19F). These rapidly develop a central papule that

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 455

FIGURE 6-25. A, C. yasguri adult, larva, and eggs from skin scraping (low power). B, C.
yasguri adult mite showing the diagnostic hooks of the accessory mouthparts.

456 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
becomes vesicular and then pustular, finally rupturing to produce a yellow crusted lesion
that is frequently excoriated because of the intense pruritus. Although the lesions are
severely inflamed, they are well demarcated from surrounding skin. Older lesions have an
area of central necrosis, which is highly diagnostic. Constant animal contact is usually
needed to maintain human infections. With no further infestation, lesions subside in 3
weeks.
Symptoms in dogs and cats are variable and range from virtually none to an intensely
pruritic dermatitis. Any breed of animal can be affected, but there may be an increased
frequency in Cocker spaniels.P? Initially, most infested animals develop a dorsally oriented
dry scaling with minimal or no pruritus (see Fig. 6-19D). These initial signs are probably
due to inflammation caused by the mites' feeding. Because a eat's natural grooming
removes both scale and mites and eggs (both can be found in feces), these initial signs
tend to be less noticeable and disease progression is often slower than in the nongrooming
dog. With time, the scaling becomes more severe and widespread (see Fig. 6-20E), hair
loss can occur, and the level of pruritus tends to increase. In some animals, the intensity
of the pruritus is well out of proportion to the number of mites present, suggesting the
development of a hypersensitivity to the mite.i" Animals in this latter group can have an
exfoliative erythroderma or a scabies-like condition with the same distribution of lesions
and intensity of pruritus. Some cats have a widespread papulocrustous eruption (miliary
dermatitisl." 127 Other cats have self-induced dorsal hypotrichosis ("fur-mOwing") with little
or no skin lesions.
Diagnosis

The diagnosis is confirmed by identifying the mite or its eggs. This process can be
difficult, especially in cats. Techniques used to identify the mite include direct examination of the animal with a powerful magnifying glass and examination of superficial skin
scrapings obtained with a scalpel, acetate tape impressions, a large amount of hair and
scale collected with a flea comb, or fecal Hotations.P? In the feces, Cheyletiella eggs
resemble hookworm eggs but they are three to four times larger (230 by 100 /-Lm) and are
often embryonated. The success rate of each technique depends on the length of the
animal's coat, the size of the area sampled, and most important, the number of mites
present.
The most reliable method appears to be the flea combing technique, but this test can
be negative in 15% of dogs 129 and 58% of cats.P? Hair and scale collected in the comb
can be evaluated in two ways. The first involves transferring the material to a Petri dish,
covering it with mineral oil, and examining its contents with a dissecting microscope. In
the second method, the hair and debris are dissolved by treating the sample with 10%
potassium hydroxide in a warm water bath for approximately 30 minutes. After this
treatment, fecal flotation solutions are added and the solution is centrifuged at 1500 rpm
for 10 minutes. The surface layer is examined microscopically at low power for mites or
eggs. Each method has advantages and disadvantages, and no studies have been done to
compare the two methods. In the absence of positive mite identification, a therapeutic
trial may be necessary to confirm or negate the diagnosis.
The differential diagnosis depends on the clinical presentation. If just scaling is
present in dogs, the differential diagnosis includes primary seborrhea, intestinal parasitism,
poor nutrition, demodicosis, otodectic mange, pediculosis, and flea infestation. If intense
pruritus occurs, scabies, flea bite hypersensitivity, and food hypersensitivity must also be
considered. For cats, diabetes mellitus and liver disease must be included if seborrhea is
present, whereas feline scabies and the other differential diagnostic possibilities for miliary
dermatitis must be considered with pruritus.
Histopathologic study reveals varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis
(hyperplastic or spongiotic). In some cases, an interface lichenoid lymphoplasmacytic
dermatitis is seen. Mite segments are occasionally found within the hyperkeratotic stratum
corneum (Fig. 6-26). Eosinophils vary in number, from few to many.

Treatment
In many instances, Cheyletiella infestation can be resolved by the weekly application of
various pesticides to all dogs and cats in contact with the mites. Product selection and its

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 457

FIGURE 6-26. Cheyletiellosis in
a dog. Note sections of mites within
the stratum corneum.

route of administration depend on the species, the age of the animals, and the nature of
the animals' coat and dermatitis. Lime sulfur dips or the various flea products are usually
effective when applied weekly for 3 to 4 weeks. One treatment with fipronil spray or spoton is effective. 96a. iou-, 121 Conventionally, environmental treatment was not recommended.
Many veterinarians have recognized cases in which these treatments did not work or
relapses occurred. These problems can result from poor pesticide application, resistance to
pesticide, nasal sequestration of mites, or reinfestation from the environment. One investigator reported the failure of some routine flea products, the need to treat some animals
for long periods, and the isolation of live mites from furniture.i" She recommended fleatype environmental treatments every second week and treatment of animals with lime
sulfur, pyrethrins, or amitraz (dogs only) for 6 to 8 weeks.
If relapse occurs, nasal sequestration is known, the owners are physically disabled, or
kennels or catteries are infested, satisfactory control usually necessitates the use of ivermectin at 200 to 300 JLglkg. 6 , 129 Two injections at 14-day intervals or three oral doses
given weekly should be sufficient. Milbemycin remains unproven but should be effective.
Canine Demodicosis

Demodicosis (demodectic mange, follicular mange, or red mange) is an inflammatory
parasitic disease of dogs characterized by the presence of larger than normal numbers of
demodectic mites. The initial proliferation of mites may be due to a genetic or immunologic disorder.
Cause and Pathogenesis

• Parasite. The mite Demodex canis is part of the normal fauna of canine skin and is
present in small numbers in most healthy dogS.187-189 Two other mites with different
morphologic features have been recognized in some dogs with generalized demodicOSis. 146. 165. 174 These mites could be mutants of D. canis or additional species of mite that
have gone unrecognized. The skin of dogs with demodicosis is ecologically favorable to the
reproduction and growth of demodectic mites. They seize this opportunity to colonize the
hair follicles and to populate the skin by the thousands. The resulting alopecia and
erythema are known as demodicosis. The entire life cycle of the mite is spent on the
skin.199 The parasite resides within the hair follicles and rarely in the sebaceous glands,
where it subsists by feeding on cells, sebum, and epidermal debris. The variant mites
appear to inhabit only the surface keratin and not the hair follicles.
Four stages of D. canis may be demonstrated in skin scrapings (Fig. 6-27). Fusiform
eggs hatch into small, six-legged larvae, which molt into eight-legged nymphs and then

458 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-27. Adult and immature forms of Demodex canis.

Egg

Larva

Nymph

Adult

into eight-legged adults (Fig. 6_28).189 The male adult measures 40 by 250 /-Lm and the
female adult is 40 by 300 /-Lm. Mites (all stages) may be found in the lymph nodes, the
intestinal wall, the spleen, the liver, the kidney, the urinary bladder, the lung, the thyroid
gland, blood, urine, and feces. However, mites found in these extracutaneous sites are
usually dead and degenerate, and represent simple drainage to these areas by blood or
lymph.
In the late 1980s, a short-tailed demodicid mite was identified in the dog and is being
recognized more frequently 146. 147. 174, 199a The mite ranges from 90 to 148 /-Lm in length,147
which is a third to one-half as long as the typical D. canis mite. Beyond its size, this mite
seems to share the features of D, canis (e.g., acquired at birth, follicular residence). Some
dogs show both types of mite on skin scraping.
In the 1990s, a long-bodied demodicid mite was identified in dogs.165, 183a This mite is
334 to 368 /-Lm in length. Histologically, it is found in hair follicles.
• Transmission. D. canis is a normal resident of a dog's skin and ear canal. Transmission occurs from the bitch to nursing neonates by direct contact during the first 2 or 3
days of neonatal life. 156 Mites may be demonstrated in the hair follicles of puppies by the
time they are 16 hours old, The mites are first observed on the muzzle of the puppies,
which emphasizes the importance of direct contact and nursing. When puppies were
taken by cesarean section and raised away from the infected bitch, they did not harbor
mites, indicating that in utero transmission does not occur.P" 201 Similarly, mites cannot
be demonstrated in stillborn puppies.!" Although mites can be transferred to normal
adults by the application of mite-laden solutions to their skin or by close confinement with
a dog with generalized demodicosis.!" 153 progressive disease does not occur. Any lesions
that occur resolve spontaneously. 198. 201
Sako199 found the thermotactic zone of D. canis to be between 16° and 41°C (60° to
106°F). Movement of the mites ceased at environmental temperatures below 15°C (59°F).
Under various laboratory and artificial conditions, mites could live away from dogs for as
long as 37 days.199 However, these mites lost their ability to infect (invade the hair follicles
of) dogs. On a more practical note, after they are on the surface of the skin, mites are
rapidly killed by desiccation in 45 to 60 minutes at 20°C (68°F) and a relative humidity of
40%.188
Efforts to study the mite have been hampered by the inability to keep it alive in the
laboratory. Recently, dog skin grafted to nude mice supported the growth and development of Demodex canis, which should allow detailed studies on the pathology and immunology of demodicosis.l-"

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 459

• Types of Demodicosis. Two types of demodicosis are generally recognized: localized
and generalized. The course and the prognosis of the two types are vastly different.
Localized demodicosis occurs as one to several small, circumscribed, erythematous, scaly
nonpruritic to pruritic areas of alopecia, most commonly on the face and the forelegs. The

FIGURE 6-28. Demodex canis (X 500), A, Two adults (four pairs of legs), B, Adult and
larva (three pairs of stubby legs),
Illustration continued on following page

460 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-28. Continued. C, Nymph (four pairs of stubby legs). D, Egg (arrow).

course is benign and most cases resolve spontaneously. In a small number of cases, the
localized proliferation of mites occurs only in the ear canals.P" These dogs have a
ceruminous otitis extema, which may be pruritic. Treatment usually is needed. Generalized demodicosis usually covers large areas of the body but can be more localized,
especially when the disease first starts. A dog who has many localized lesions has involve-

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 46 I

ment of an entire body region (e.g., facial area), or has complete involvement of two feet
or more has generalized demodicosis. There is no uniformly accepted standard as to how
many localized lesions are needed before generalized disease is diagnosed. Six or fewer
usually indicates localized disease, whereas 12 or more is indicative of generalized disease.
The intermediate group must be evaluated on an individualized basis. The disease may
stay restricted in its scope or may become more generalized. Even with this relative
localization of the lesions, the pathogenesis, prognosis, and treatment regimens remain the
same as that for dogs with widespread demodicosis.
Generalized demodicosis usually starts during puppyhood (3 to 18 months). If the
lesions do not resolve spontaneously or receive adequate treatment, the patient carries the
disease into adulthood. It is not uncommon to make the diagnOSiS of generalized demodicosis in dogs older than 2 years of age. The majority of these cases occur in dogs between
2 and 5 years of age, and most of these dogs have had a chronic skin disease. These dogs
typically have had the demodicosis from puppyhood but went undiagnosed. Dogs who first
experience the disease at 4 years of age or older have true adult-onset demodicosis.
True adult-onset generalized demodicosis is rare, but when it occurs, it can be as
serious as the juvenile form. In these cases, the dog has tolerated and controlled the
demodectic mites as part of its normal cutaneous fauna for years. If the resistance of the
host decreases, the mites suddenly multiply by the thousands. One can speculate that
some internal diseases may cause immunosuppression or otherwise lower the dog's capacity to control the number of mites, and adult-onset demodicosis occurs. Each year the
authors see multiple cases of adult-onset demodicosis, especially with a facial or pedal
presentation, in which skin scrapings have not been performed. If one does not scrape the
old dog with pyoderma or other skin disease, the diagnosis will be missed.
Disorders recognized in dogs with adult-onset demodicosis include hypothyroidism,
naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, leishmaniasis, and malignant neoplasia or treatment thereof.P" 152, 171, 181a, 190 In more than 50% of cases, no underlying
disease can be documented at the time the demodicosis is diagnosed.l'" In these cases,
the dog should be monitored carefully because the malignancy or systemic illness may
become obvious weeks to months into treatment. Although the condition may resolve
spontaneously in some mildly affected dogs with the resolution of the underlying disease,
most will require treatment. If no cause for the demodicosis can be found, the odds of
successful treatment are reduced.P"
In demodectic pododermatitis, the disease is confined to the paws, although some
dogs have a higher than normal population of mites in their clinically normal skin.
Demodectic pododermatitis can occur as a result of generalized demodicosis, in which the
lesions heal everywhere except on the paws. The foot can be involved, especially in Old
English sheepdogs, without generalized lesions. The digital, interdigital, and plantar involvements are almost always complicated by secondary bacterial infections (see Fig.
6-29G and H).
Demodicosis is more common in purebred dogs, and certain breeds have far more
frequent disease than other breeds. In the Cornell population, the 10 breeds with the
highest statistical risk of generalized demodicosis are the Shar pei, West Highland white
terrier, Scottish terrier, English bulldog, Boston terrier, Great Dane, Weimaraner, Airedale terrier, Alaskan malamute, and Afghan hound.'?" Demodicosis is commonly diagnosed
in other breeds (e.g., Doberman pinscher), but the frequency in those breeds is not out of
proportion to the number of dogs within that breed. In other clinics, the Doberman
pinscher is at risk so the local statistics must always be kept in mind. 185
A hereditary predisposition has been observed regularly in breeding kennels. Certain
breeders can predict which litters will have the disease. In an affected litter, all or some
of the Siblings experience generalized demodicosis. Elimination of affected or carrier dogs
(both parents and Siblings) from a breeding program greatly reduces or eliminates the
incidence of demodicosis in that population of dogs. By following this strict culling
program, some kennels have virtually eliminated the disease from their line. Analysis of
the incidence data from one collie kennel (WHM) and one beagle kennel (DWS) conducted by the authors suggested an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.

FIGURE 6-29. A, Periocular alopecia and hyperpigmentation in a dog with localized demodicosis. B, Houndcross with chronic generalized demodicosis. C, A 9-month-old Doberman pinscher whose face is disfigured by the
effects of the disease. The loose fold of skin at the throat containing numerous pustules is characteristic. D,
Follicular papules, crusts, and alopecia over the dorsal neck and top of the head of a dog with generalized
demodicosis. E, Follicular papules, crusts, and alopecia on the leg of a dog with generalized demodicosis. F, Welldemarcated, alopecic, crusted patches of generalized demodicosis with pyoderma on the rump of a West
Highland White terrier. These lesions are not easily recognized unless the hair is clipped away. G, Canine
demodectic pododermatitis. Erythema, alopecia, hyperpigmentation of a paw. H, Chronic pododermatitis in a dog
with demodectic pododermatitis.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 463
Other predisposing factors suggested for demodicosis include age, short hair, poor
nutrition, estrus, parturition, stress, endoparasites, and debilitating diseases. In two studies,
dogs relapsing after or not responding to treatment with ivermectin or milbemycin were
intact females.l'< 183b Most of these factors are difficult to evaluate and many are highly
unlikely to be predisposing factors, Length of hair coat, size and activity of sebaceous
glands, sex of the animal, and biotin deficiency have no effect on the development or
progression of demodicosis.P" In fact, the great majority of clinical cases are seen in
purebred dogs that are receiving excellent diets and are otherwise in generally good
condition,
If most dogs harbor the Demodex mite as part of their normal fauna, the question
must be answered why some dogs develop demodicosis and other dogs do not, Differences in the virulence of some Demodex strains have been considered but seem unlikely.
In litters with demodicosis, some puppies have serious disease whereas others remain
normal. Because these normal puppies have been exposed to the same mite population as
their affected littermates, demodicosis cannot be solely associated with the strain of mite.
The induction of demodicosis in dogs treated with antilymphocyte serum'<" demonstrated
the probable role of immunodeficiency in this disease. The development of demodicosis in
adult dogs undergoing immunosuppressive treatments'P? or having cancer or serious metabolic disorders-w 158 supported this theory, However, broad-based immunosuppression
does not explain most cases of demodicosis. If puppies with generalized demodicosis were
compromised immunologically, they should develop viral disorders, pneumonias, or other
systemic infections and they do not. 201, 202 Likewise, most adult dogs having cancer,
especially of the lymphoreticular system, or undergoing immunosuppressive treatment for
autoimmune disorders or cancer should develop demodicosis and they do not. A mitespecific immunoincompetence of varying severity helps explain these disparities. Immunologic studies that support this theory are described in the following sections.
• Nonspecific Immunity. Nonspecific immunity in canine demodicosis has been
studied in the neutrophil and complement systems. No absolute deficiencies of neutrophils or abnormalities in neutrophil morphologic features have been observed.F": 202 Additionally, dogs with proven neutrophil dysfunction do not develop demodicosis. Limited
complement studies have not shown any association of complement deficiency with demodicosis.205, 207
• Humoral Immunity. Dogs with generalized demodicosis typically have normal
to elevated numbers of plasma cells in their skin, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and
spleen.P": 202 When these dogs are vaccinated with Aleutian mink disease virus or canine
distemper-infectious canine hepatitis vaccine, they can mount a normal antibody response.r" The number of IgE-bearing mast cells in the skin of dogs with demodicosis is
identical to that found in specific pathogen-free dogs. 163 Most dogs with generalized
demodicosis have a hyperglobulinemia and show a reactive serum protein electrophoretic
pattern.F" Dogs with IgM or IgA deficiency do not appear to be predisposed to demodicosis.205 All of these studies demonstrate that humoral immunodeficiency is not the cause
of demodicosis and that many of these dogs have hyperreactive B cell responses. This
hyperreactivity may be the result of T cell hyporeactivity.
• Cellular Immunity. Dogs with chronic generalized demodicosis have depressed T cell function, as measured by the in vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis (IVLB)
test l48, 149, 166, 201, 202 or skin testing with phytohemagglutinin, concanavalin A, or dinitroohlorobenzene.lw 164, 206 Because these dogs are rarely lymphopenic and have no hypocellularity of the T cell areas of the lymph nodes and spleen, the deficiency appears to be
one of function rather than numbers.
The IVLB test can be performed by various methods, is subject to a variety of
technical problems, and does not give identical results in dogs of the same breed and
age. 133 Accordingly, studies using this test should be performed in a large number of dogs
and the results must be evaluated by appropriate statistical analysis. Much of the work on
the IVLB in dogs with demodicosis was not subject to such careful scrutiny, and the
conclusions drawn may not be valid.

464 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
The original work demonstrated that the IVLB suppression seen in demodicosis was
largely caused by a humoral immunosuppressive factor. 166, 202 The factor, thought to be
either an immunoglobulin or an immune complex.l'" suppressed the blastogenesis of a
normal dog's lymphocytes, could be made less active by dilution with fetal bovine serum
or other techniques, and disappeared when the number of mites was reduced with
treatment. 166, 202 These data, coupled with the normal IVLB results from dogs with
localized demodicosis or early generalized disease.P" 148, 202 resulted in the hypothesis that
the immunosuppression of demodicosis was parasite induced, As the mites started to
proliferate, they produced, or more likely induced, the humoral factor, which suppressed
the immune response to the parasite and allowed the proliferation of the mites to
continue unchecked,
Work by Barta and colleagues'P' seemed to refute that theory, In that study, dogs
with demodicosis and no bacterial pyoderma had normal IVLB test results, whereas dogs
with demodicosis and pyoderma or pyoderma alone had IVLB suppression. The degree of
suppression in these latter dogs correlated with the severity of the pyoderma, The conclusion was that the immunosuppression was a consequence of the bacterial pyoderma, a
common problem in demodicosis, and not the mites themselves,
Subsequent work showed that dogs with demodicosis become increasingly more immunocompromised with pyoderma or increasing mite numbers 133, 162, 180, 194 but that
the immunologic abnormalities exist after the pyoderma and demodicosis are resolved. 137. 173, 193 The most recent studies have focused on the identification of the
lymphocyte subsets involved in demodicosis, 137, 141, 150, 173 Although these studies are in
their infancy, they suggest that damage done is mediated by cytotoxic T cells, which are
activated by an irregularity in T helper cell function. 141, 173 With decreased interleukin-2
(IL-2) production and IL-2 receptor expression documented, the suggestion has been
made that dogs with demodicosis have a decreased Th, response.!?" It is hoped that
further studies in the nude mouse model will completely characterize the defect,
If demodicosis is an immunodeficiency disorder, why does the condition resolve
spontaneously in some dogs and why is there significant clinical variability among litter
mates with the disease? A hereditary, D. canis-specific T cell defect of varying severity
offers an appealing solution, which answers many questions, The hereditary component is
supported by the higher prevalence in certain breeds and the association of demodicosis
with another hereditary disease in Beagles."! The D. canis-specific T cell defect is
supported by studies done with Demodex antigen. Normal dogs and in dogs in which the
demodicosis resolves spontaneously show an adequate delayed-type hypersensitivity skin
test result, whereas dogs with chronic disease do not. 148 , 149
With a severe D. canis-specific defect, the dog has generalized demodicosis with its
secondary immunosuppressive component. These dogs require vigorous treatment. With a
less pronounced defect, the dog does not experience generalized demodicosis unless some
other immunosuppressing condition occurred. If the secondary condition was resolved, the
demodicosis could resolve spontaneously or respond rapidly and completely to fairly
simple treatments. In puppies, the immunosuppressive factor could be the stress of
puppyhood, whereas more serious immunosuppressive diseases would be necessary in
adult dogs.

Clinical Features
• Localized Demodicosis. In this variation of demodicosis, a patch of skin develops
mild erythema and partial alopecia. Pruritus may be present, and the area may be covered
with fine silvery scales. One to several squamous patches can be present. The most
common site is the face, especially the periocular area and the commissures of the mouth
(see Figs. 6-20G and Hand 6-29A). Next in order of occurrence are the forelegs. More
rarely, one or more patches are seen on the trunk or the rear legs or the dog presents for
a bilateral ceruminous otitis extema. Most cases occur at 3 to 6 months of age and heal
spontaneously without treatment. It is rare for true localized demodicosis in a dog to
progress to generalized disease. When the disease is controlled, hair begins to regrow

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 465

within 30 days. Lesions can come and go over a period of several months. Recurrences
are rare because the skin has apparently become a less favorable habitat for the rapid
reproduction of mites or the immunocompetence of the host has returned to normal.
Rarely, dogs have only demodectic otitis externa.P"
• Generalized Demodicosis. Although localized demodicosis is a mild clinical disease, generalized demodicosis is one of the most severe canine skin diseases; it can
terminate fatally. The disease can be widespread from the onset (see Fig. 6-29B) but
usually starts with multiple poorly circumscribed areas of disease, which worsen rather
than improve with time. Numerous lesions appear on the head (see Fig. 6-29C), the legs,
and the trunk. Ear canal involvement usually accompanies other facial lesions. Each lesion
gets larger, and some coalesce to form patches (see Fig. 6-29F). Follicular hyperkeratosis
is often marked, and close examination of lesions often reveals follicular openings accentuated and plugged with conical hyperkeratoses, whereas follicular casts are prominent at
various levels on hair shafts. Although some dogs with demodicosis have only seborrheic
changes (Fig. 6-30A), mites developing in the hair follicle usually produce a folliculitis.
Peripheral lymphadenopathy is marked. When secondary pyoderma complicates these
lesions, edema and crusting elevate the patches into plaques. Deep folliculitis develops,
and exudates are produced and form thick crusts (see Figs. 6-29D to F). Some dogs
present with atypical lesions, for example, nodules, so demodicosis must always be kept in
mind. 184 English bulldogs may be predisposed to this nodular presentation.
Bacteria thrive under these crusts and in the follicles. Staphylococcus intermedius is
the most common bacterial organism to complicate generalized demodicosis. Pseudorrwnas
aeruginosa causes severe pyogenic complications and is especially refractory when it
occurs with demodectic pododermatitis. Proteus mirabilis is another serious secondary
bacterial invader in generalized demodectic mange.
After several months, the chronically infected skin is covered with crusted, pyogenic,
hemorrhagic, and follicular-furuncular lesions. The abdomen is least affected, perhaps
because fewer hair follicles are in that area. Numerous lesions are concentrated on the
head and neck, and involvement may be severe. Many owners elect euthanasia for their
pets at this stage .
• Demodectic Pododermatitis. Demodicosis can be present on the feet of dogs
without generalized lesions. The case history reveals whether the dog once had generalized demodicosis that healed, except for the foot lesions, or whether the paws were the
only part of the body ever affected. The digital and interdigital lesions are especially
susceptible to secondary pyodermas (see Fig. 6-29G and H). In some animals, demodectic pododermatitis can be chronic and extremely resistant to therapy. The pain and edema
is especially distressing to large dogs such as Great Danes, Newfoundlands, St. Bernards,
and Old English sheepdogs.
In summary, disease in one dog can progress through the following stages: fairly
localized demodicosis, generalized demodicosis, generalized pyogenic demodicosis, and
chronic pyogenic demodectic pododermatitis.

Diagnosis
Skin scrapings that are properly made and interpreted can establish the diagnosis of
demodicosis. The affected skin should be squeezed firmly to extrude the mites from the
hair follicles, and skin scrapings should be deep and extensive. Extremely fragile areas
should be avoided because the resultant hemorrhage usually makes interpretation of the
results difficult. Diagnosis is made either by demonstrating large numbers of adult mites
or by finding an increased ratio of immature forms (ova, larvae, and nymphs) to adults.
The demonstration of an occasional adult mite in skin scrapings is consistent with a
diagnosis of normal skin, not demodicosis. However, because it is uncommon to find a
Derrwdex mite in the scrapings from normal dogs, the finding of one mite should not be
ignored. The dog should be scraped at several additional sites before the diagnosis of
demodicosis is dismissed.
The diagnosis of demodicosis can be made in some dogs with a seborrheic presentation or pododermatitis by trichography. Haired skin with surface and follicular hyperkera-

466 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-30. A, Diffuse scaling, follicular casts, and focal erythema and alopecia over the back of a dog
with generalized demodicosis. B, Feline demodicosis. Alopecia and scaling of forehead and ears. C, Feline
demodicosis. Alopecia and hyperpigmentation of chin and lip. D, Bilaterally symmetric alopecia in a cat with
generalized dernodicosis. (Courtesy B. Stein.) E, Canine scabies 4 weeks after onset in a Japanese spaniel.
Fourteen dogs in a kennel were affected. This illustrates the typical distribution pattern. F, Closer view of
same patient as in E, showing area on elbow where diagnostic skin scraping was made. The typical papular
"rash" is well illustrated in this view. G, Ear margin showing characteristic grayish yellow crusts on affected
skin. H, Crusted lesions on the elbow that are typical of a chronic case.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 467

tosis (hair casts) is selected for sampling. In heavily infested dogs, a large number of mites
will be trapped in the explanted follicular keratin. This testing can be negative in mildly
diseased dogs and should never be used during therapeutic monitoring as a replacement
for the skin scraping.
Skin scraping appears to be a straightforward, easy laboratory procedure, however,
every year, the authors continue to receive cases on referral that somehow had negative
findings on scraping and were misdiagnosed. Adequate skin scrapings are mandatory in all
cases of canine pyoderma and seborrhea complex. When negative skin scraping findings
are obtained from a Shar pei or from a dog with fibrotic lesions, especially in the
interdigital region, a skin biopsy specimen should be examined before demodicosis is
ruled out.
Clinical laboratory tests in young dogs with demodicosis usually show no consistent
abnormalities. Anemia of chronic disease, elevations in white blood cell numbers, hyperglobulinemia, and depressed baseline thyroid hormone. levels are found in many dogs. The
depressed thyroid hormone values are usually the result of the demodicosis (euthyroid sick
syndrome; see Chap. 10) and not its cause. In cases of adult-onset demodicosis, these
routine tests become more significant in identifying the cause of the demodicosis. If
baseline thyroid hormone levels are depressed, additional thyroid testing should be performed because hypothyroidism can trigger demodicosis in the adult dog. 152. 195 Unexplained elevations in liver enzyme activity should lead to the consideration of adrenal
function tests (see Chap. 10) for hyperadrenocorticism, a common cause of adult-onset
demodicosis.l'< 158

Histopathology
Skin biopsy specimens from dogs with localized or generalized demodicosis show follicles
containing mites and 'keratinous debris (Figs. 6-31 and 6-32). Dogs with demodicosis
have an active local cutaneous response that increases with the severity of clinical disease. 142, 150 Three commonly recognized patterns of inflammation are interface mural
folliculitis, nodular dermatitis, and suppurative folliculitis and furunculosis.v" Interface
mural folliculitis, in which plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages, mast cells, and eosinophils are found around the follicles and lymphocytes are found infiltrating the epithelium,
is a consistent finding and the infiltrating lymphocytes are CD3+ and CD8+. 141 Perifollicular granulomas surrounding mite fragments can be seen in approximately 25% of cases,
and 20% have a suppurative furunculosis as the main pattern. Perifollicular melanosis is

FIGURE 6-31. Demodicosis in a
dog. Note hair follicles containing
numerous mite segments and a pyogranuloma due to follicular rupture
(upper right),

468 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-32. Demodicosis in a
dog. Note numerous mite segments
within hair follicles.

also a common finding in skin biopsy specimens from dogs with generalized demodicosis
(Fig. 6_33).142. 144
To date, skin biopsy is not reliable in differentiating localized from generalized demodicosis or in indicating whether spotaneous resolution is likely. However, if
mites are numerous and there is minimal to absent cellular response or eosinophils are

FIGURE 6-33. Demodicosis. Interface mural folliculitis and
perifollicular melanosis. Mite fragments are visible in lumen of the
follicle.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 469
absent, especially when there is a furunculosis, the dog likely has severe immunosuppression.

Differential Diagnosis
Because skin scrapings easily reveal mites in the vast majority of cases of demodicosis, the
disease should not be confused with other disorders. Generalized pyoderma may resemble
demodicosis, and demodicosis should be suspected in every case of folliculitis. Dermatophytosis resembles patches of localized demodicosis. Superficial abrasions in young dogs
sometimes resemble the erythematous patches of localized demodicosis. Conversely, demodicosis may be mistaken for abrasions. Muzzle folliculitis or furunculosis (acne) or early
lesions of juvenile cellulitis on the face of young dogs sometimes resemble pustular
demodicosis, and certain demodectic pustules on the abdomen and inside surface of the
thighs resemble canine impetigo. Differentiation can be made by examination of exudative
cytology and skin scrapings. Contact dermatitis exhibits erythematous papules that occasionally resemble squamous demodicosis. Pemphigus complex, lupus erythematosus, and
dermatomyositis facial lesions can also mimic demodicosis.
Clinical Management
• Localized Demodicosis. This is a mild disease that usually heals spontaneously in
6 to 8 weeks but may wax and wane in a localized area for months. There is no difference
in healing between treated and untreated cases. There is no evidence that treatment of
localized demodicosis prevents generalization in cases so destined. If the clinician believes
that some form of treatment is indicated, a mild topical parasitide used to treat ear mites
or benzoyl peroxide gel (OxyDex gel, Pyoben gel) can be gently massaged into the
alopecic area once a day. The medication should be rubbed in the direction of the hair
growth so that as few hairs as possible are pulled out. The owner should be informed that
the medications and the rubbing necessary to apply them worsen the lesions for 2 to 3
weeks. This does not affect the outcome of the disease, because the lesions only appear to
be getting larger. It is important to check the general health status of the dog at this time,
paying special attention to diet, endoparasite problems, and vaccination needs. Amitraz is
not a rational nor approved treatment for localized demodicosis, and its use here may
allow the mites to develop resistance to it.
At a return visit 4 weeks later, the veterinarian can determine whether there are any
indications of generalized demodicosis. The skin scraping at the beginning of localized
demodicosis often reveals numbers of live adult mites and immature forms. After 4 weeks
of treatment, skin scrapings from healing cases should show fewer mites, fewer immature
forms, and sometimes no live mites. If the lesions are spreading and the mite count
(including the ratio of immature to adult) is high, the condition may be progressing to
generalized demodicosis.
• Generalized Demodicosis. This can be the most serious non-neoplastic skin disease a veterinarian will treat. Although the prognosis for generalized demodicosis has
improved dramatically since the mid-90s, it still is not an easily treated disease and the
owner should be made aware of this from the onset. With intense treatment, most cases,
probably near 90%, can be cured, but it may take nearly a year. Depending on the dog
and the drug used, treatment can cost many hundreds of dollars and involve many hours
of work on the owner's part. A common problem in the treatment of generalized demodicosis is premature cessation of therapy and, in many instances, occurs because the owner
did not understand the entire course of treatment. These frustrations can be minimized
by having an indepth discussion about the costs and requirements of treatment before any
is undertaken.
Not all dogs need miticidal treatments. More than 30% to 50% of dogs younger than
1 year of age with generalized demodicosis recover spontaneously. In dogs with a familial
history of demodicosis, the condition may resolve spontaneously, but the rate probably is
much lower than that seen with no familial history. Intact females may experience exacerbation or relapse of disease when they come into estrus and may be more resistant to
treatment.P'- 183b Ovariohysterectomy is strongly recommended. No data are available

470 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
to indicate whether treatment accelerates the dog's self-cure, and this significant rate of
self-cure can confound therapeutic studies. Studies that do not specify the age of the dogs
or the extent of disease cannot be evaluated critically. To euthanize 6- to 12-month-old
dogs because they have severe generalized demodicosis is unwarranted, because some of
them recover spontaneously if secondary pyodermas and seborrheas are controlled and the
general health status is good. Dogs older than 1 to 2 years of age or dogs with adult-onset
generalized demodicosis require treatment.
Before the institution of any treatment for the demodicosis, the dog's general health
and management should be improved, if necessary. This is especially true for dogs with
adult-onset disease. Their disease was triggered by some systemic disorder, and resolution
of the underlying condition allows the demodicosis to resolve spontaneously or to respond
better to treatment.
Dogs with demodicosis need to be examined and have skin scrapings performed at
regular intervals, typically every 2 to 4 weeks. To determine the efficacy of treatment, the
skin scrapings should always be done at the same sites and the results should be recorded
in tabular fashion. A sheet of paper with the dog schematic for identification of the
scraping sites and tabulation of results is most helpful.
The pyoderma and seborrhea seen in dogs with demodicosis is a result of the mite
infestation and cannot be cured until the mites are eradicated. However, these problems
should be addressed before topical acaricidal treatment to make the skin less irritable and
to allow better penetration of the dip. Antibiotic selection varies with the case, but
bactericidal agents should be selected because of the probable immunosuppressed state of
the dog. Because of the high frequency of deep pyodermas in these dogs, courses of
treatment of 6 to 8 weeks are commonplace. Because of the expense of this long-term
treatment, the temptation is to use suboptimal dosages or a shortened course of treatment. Both measures can result in more serious infections and should be avoided.
How long does one wait for the condition to resolve spontaneously? If a dog still has
clinical disease by the time it is 12 months of age, the odds of spontaneous resolution are
remote. In most dogs, the need for treatment will be known much sooner. After the first
4 to 6 weeks of observation, when most dogs worsen because subclinical lesions become
clinical, the dog who is destined to self-cure will show continual clinical improvement and
reduction in its mite burden. If the mite count remains static or starts to increase,
spontaneous resolution is unlikely.
Over the years, dozens of treatments have been used in demodicosis. Many were of
no value, and some effective ones are no longer available.P" New treatments are always
being studied to increase our cure rate, which is approximately 90%.186. 197. 200 Lufenuron
failed to produce clinical improvement or decrease mite counts in dogs with generalized
demodicosis, even though skin levels of the compound were about 10 times those in
blood. 200
Miticidal treatments can be given orally or applied topically. Treatments must continue until skin scrapings are negative and then for an additional 30 days or longer. Dogs
always achieve clinical cure weeks before parasitologic cure. Parasitologic cure means that
skin scrapings from the dog contain no live or dead mites at any stage of development.
Derrwdex skeletons are translucent and can be overlooked if full illumination is used. The
diaphragm on the condenser should be closed down to increase the contrast and visibility
of the skeletons. A minimum of four to six sites should be negative at the same time to
declare parasitologic cure. Site selection varies from case to case but always should
include at least one from the face and front feet.
Amitraz is the only licensed product in the United States and Canada for the treatment of generalized demodicosis. The drug is diamide, N'-(2,4-dimethylphenyl)-N-[[(2,4dimethylphenyl)imino]methyl]-N-methylmethanidamide. 19 It is marketed in the United
States and Canada as Mitaban. Slightly different formulations of amitraz are marked
worldwide as Ectodex Dog Wash or Taktic.P" Amitraz is also available in a 9% antitick
collar, and claims for its efficacy in the treatment of demodicosis have been made. ISS
Unfortunately, this Simple method of treatment is ineffective.P"
In the United States and Canada, Mitaban is licensed for use at 250 ppm with an

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 471
application frequency of 14 days. To achieve maximal results, it is imperative to follow this
protocol:
1. Dogs with medium-length or long coats should be clipped closely to allow the
aqueous solution to contact the skin and penetrate the hair follicle better.
2. All crusts are removed. In some cases, tranquilization or anesthesia is necessary,
because some crusts adhere tightly and removal without anesthesia is painful.
Remember to avoid sedating agents that are a-adrenergic agonists (e.g., benzodiazepines, xylazine), which can cause synergistic toxicity.
3. The entire dog is washed with a medicated shampoo designed to kill bacteria and
remove scales and exudates. Soaking in a whirlpool bath or a gentle stream of
water is beneficial. Even though the skin may appear raw and irritated after the
above-mentioned procedures, the medication can have optimal contact with the
affected skin. The dog is gently dried with a towel. Alternatively, the cleaning
preparation can be done the day before treatment.
4. Amitraz solution is applied by wetting and sponging. The solution must be applied
to the entire body - to normal as well as to affected areas of skin. Although the
solution is not irritating, it is mandatory for persons applying amitraz to wear
protective gloves and to work in a well-ventilated area. Amitraz causes a transitory
sedative effect for 12 to 24 hours, especially after the first treatment, and some
dogs become pruritic after the first few applications. Other side effects are rare
and include allergic reactions (urticaria and edema), skin irritation, and a variety of
systemic signs. Severe reactions or intoxications can be treated with yohimbine,
atipamezole, and other appropriate supportive measures.l" 28 The occurrence or
severity of the side effects usually diminishes with subsequent applications. Rarely,
dogs have increasingly severe reactions to amitraz dips: marked weakness, ataxia,
and somnolence. If amitraz therapy is still desirable, dogs can be pretreated with
yohimbine, which can prevent or markedly reduce the severity of these adverse
effects. Exposure to amitraz can cause contact dermatitis, migraine-like headaches,
or asthma-like attacks in some people. If there is demodectic pododermatitis, the
paws can be immersed in a small pan containing amitraz solution and gently
massaged to facilitate penetration. One should not rinse the feet or the body. The
medication should remain on the skin for 2 weeks. Although about half the drug is
retained in the skin for 2 weeks, some may be lost if the dog gets wet or swims. In
this case, a new application may be given before the next treatment is due.
5. Although it is not necessary to repeat clipping and shampooing before each treatment, it makes sense to remove any new crusts before each treatment.
With

this

protocol,

reported clinical cure rates

vary from

zero

to

nearly

90%.153. 182, 203 More frequent applications at this or higher concentrations increases the recovery rate,169, 170 When used weekly at a concentration of 500 or 1000 ppm, cure rates
approaching 100% are reported.P" 145, 161 These therapeutic modifications are an extralabel

drug use, increase the labor intensity of treatment, and markedly increase the cost of
treatment. The aqueous solution may not be effective in the ears or on the feet. In these
cases, amitraz in mineral oil (1:9) can be effective.
Some percentage of dogs are not cured of their generalized demodicosis with the
licensed amitraz protocol. When cure is not attainable, four options are available: euthanasia, control with regularly scheduled dips every 2 to 4 weeks, extralabel use of Mitaban or
another EPA-registered parasiticide, or use of an avermectin or milbemycin. It is a
violation of United States federal law to use an EPA-registered pesticide in a manner
inconsistent with its labeling, even when treating generalized demodicosis. Accordingly,
the extralabel use of an EPA-registered pesticide should be the last resort.
Some investigators retreat amitraz treatment failures with that chemical but at a
higher frequency (every seventh day), either at the licensed strength (250 ppm) or at
higher concentrations (500, 750, or 1000 ppm). As mentioned earlier, these therapeutic
modifications can cure some initial treatment failures. The product information on Mita-

472 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
ban shows an increasing frequency of side effects as the topical concentration increases.
Most side effects are transient and of low frequency at concentrations less than 1250 ppm.
It is rare for a dog who tolerated dipping at 250 ppm every 14th day to experience clinical
side effects when Mitaban is used at 500 ppm every seventh day. No published data are
available on higher concentrations of Mitaban, but it can probably be used safely at 750 or
1000 ppm, as the European products are. 139 The cure rate is increased with the extralabel
use of amitraz, but some dogs, perhaps as many as 20%, do not attain negative scraping
results or experience relapse when treatment is stopped.l'"
In the early 90s, pilot studies on the efficacy of orally administered ivermectin or
milbemycin were conducted with the hope of finding a therapeutic alternative for dogs
who could not tolerate amitraz or be cured by it. 157. 178. 191 The results of those studies
were so positive that it is now commonplace to treat generalized demodicosis with either
product. The reader is reminded that this is an extralabel drug usage, and treatment
should not be undertaken without satisfaction of the guidelines for extralabel usage.
Because these drugs are simple to use and return the dog to clinical normalcy very
quickly, it is imperative that the owner understand all aspects of the disease and its
treatment. Because treatment is Simple and straightforward, some owners do not understand why they should not use the dog for breeding. The authors will not treat any dog
with any drug if it is to be used for breeding. An even more common problem is
premature cessation of treatment because the dog looked normal. All dogs look normal
well before skin scrapings are negative with parasitologic cure lagging behind clinical cure
by 0.5 to 6 months. 135. 154, 159. 160 If the owner stops treatment too soon, a relapse will
occur.
Data on the response of approximately 350 dogs treated with milbemycin are available
for review." Within the group, dogs of all breeds, including the breeds that are sensitive
to high-dose ivermectin; either sex; and various ages at onset of disease and onset of
treatment were treated with dosages varying from 0.5 to 2.0 mglkg given daily. Treatment
courses ranged from 60 to 300 days. Clinical cure rates varied from 15% to 92%,
depending on the dosage used and the age at onset of disease. Dogs with adult-onset
disease respond more poorly to treatment than dogs with juvenile-onset disease.'?" Cure
rates were higher with the higher dosages. In all studies, a small percentage of dogs
showed no real response to treatment. If a low dosage was being used, a dosage increase
often resulted in clinical cure, but some dogs never achieved cure at 2 mglkg. It is
unknown what higher dosages might have done for those dogs.
Published data on the efficacy of ivermectin are more limited, with approximately 100
cases available for review. 154. 159. 176. 183b. 191. 196 Dosages used vary from 0.35 to 0.6 mglkg/
day and treatment courses ranged from 35 to 210 days. The rate of clinical cure varied
from 83% to 100%. Preliminary data on an alternate-day protocol, in which the dog
receives 0.45 to 0.6 mglkg, suggest that daily treatment may not be necessary.P"
As new avermectins and milbemycins become available or different formulations of
the available ones are investigated, other potentially effective treatments will become
available. The pour-on formulation of ivermectin is very effective in the treatment of
nonfollicular mites of the dog and cat but performed very poorly when it was applied
three times weekly at a dosage of 1.5 mglkg to dogs with generalized demodicosis.l'" Only
two of the 12 treated dogs achieved parasitologic cure. In other studies moxidectin,
another milbemycin, was given orally to dogs at dosages between 0.2 and 0.4 mglkg/
day. 135. 135a All dogs were cured, but details on long-term follow-up were unavailable.
Transient side effects included lethargy, anorexia, ataxia, and stupor. In another study,
nine dogs were given 0.3 mg/kg/day, with an 88% cure rate.P"
In all the studies published, the rate of clinical cure exceeds the true cure rate, with
relapses occurring in 10% to 45% of the cases. Although a relapse can occur at any time,
most seem to occur within the first 3 months of the discontinuation of treatment. These
relapses are probably due to insufficient treatment. The skin scraping, the only test

"See references 140, 157, 160, 167, 178, 179, 183,

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 473
available to determine parasitologic cure, is extremely crude and results can and will vary
from veterinarian to veterinarian, from site to site, and with an even so slight variation of
technique on the same dog. Even if the skin scrapings from a dog are without flaw, the
scraping represents the parasitologic status of only 4 to 6 small areas of its skin and mites
could be present a few inches away. In some cases, especially those with refractory pedal
disease, skin biopsy is used to determine the end of treatment. Obviously, this type of
testing is impractical in most cases.
For these and other reasons, treatment is not stopped when negative scrapings are
obtained but is continued for some additional period of time, usually 2 to 4 weeks. The
duration of the treatment after negative scraping should probably be based on the length
of treatment, and the authors believe it always should be 4 or more weeks. Cure rates are
higher when treatment is prolonged for 30 to 60 days beyond negative skin scrapings. 183b
If a dog relapses within the first 3 months, more aggressive treatment with the same
drug may cure it. If the second treatment results in relapse or if the first relapse occurred
9 or more months after treatment was stopped, further treatment with the drug is not
likely to cure the dog. If the dog was initially treated with milbemycin, additional treatments with ivermectin can cure the dog and vice versa.
If all of the above-mentioned methods fail and the owner still wants to try to cure the
dog, he has the option of using the farm animal formulation of amitraz (Taktic, HoechstRoussel}!" A 1250-ppm aqueous solution of the amitraz is applied to one half of the
animal's body on a rotating basis. If the feet are involved, they are treated daily. When
this protocol was used on 71 dogs, 56 (79%) were cured, with a mean course of treatment
of 3.7 months. No serious side effects were noted.
One of the authors (DWS) has consulted on cases of canine generalized demodicosis
wherein daily avermectin or milbemycin therapy had been combined with weekly amitraz
dips. The dogs developed severe neurotoxicity. In other cases, especially when the ivermectin is given once or twice weekly, no toxicity was noted with concurrent amitraz
dips.F? The use of concurrent intensive macrocyclic lactone and amitraz therapy should be
used cautiously or be avoided.
Dogs who achieve negative skin scraping results cannot be declared cured of their
disease until at least 12 months after treatment is stopped. During this waiting period, any
skin lesions that develop should be scraped and the administration of immunosuppressive
drugs should be avoided. Two dogs relapsed 13 and 18 months, respectively, following
successful treatment.P"
With current treatments, not all dogs can be cured of their demodicosis. The addition
of immunostimulants like levamisole, thiabendazole, Propionibacterium acnes (Immunoregulin, ImmunoVet), vitamin E, and muramyldipeptide-parapoxvirus combinations does
nothing to increase the cure rate.l 81, 203. The failure rate will be influenced by the nature
and vigor of the treatment, but probably 10% of dogs are incurable with any protocol. For
these dogs, the owner must choose between euthanasia or chronic maintenance therapy.
No data are available on the success and safety of long-term maintenance protocols with
milbemycin or ivermectin, but the authors have had some patients under control for over
4 years with no adverse effects. In these cases, either the milbemycin or ivermectin is
given every second to third day.
The concurrence of demodicosis and allergic skin disease (e.g., atopy) is an occasional
therapeutic challenge for the clinician. Clearly, glucocorticoids need to be avoided, if at all
possible. Symptomatic control of allergic pruritus should be attempted with antihistamines
or omega-S'omega-f fatty acids, or both. Remember, heterocyclic antidepressants are also
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and may be contraindicated in conjunction with amitraz.
Generalized demodicosis is hereditary in young dogs. Until the mode of inheritance is
established, preventive measures are impossible if affected dogs and their littermates are
used for breeding. If the disease has a recessive mode of inheritance, some normal
puppies in the litter will be truly normal, whereas other puppies will be carriers and will
pass on the trait. Because no test is available to separate normal animals from carriers, all
puppies from litters in which one or more pups is clinically affected should be culled from
breeding programs, Dermatologists do not treat dogs for generalized demodicosis if they

474 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

are to be used for breeding. General acceptance of this policy will eventually eradicate the
disease.
Feline Demodicosis

Feline demodicosis is caused by (1) Derrwdex cati,214, 216 (2) Derrwdex gatoi,2l1· 215 and (3)
an undescribed Derrwdex Sp.21Oa, 215
D. cati is much like D. canis, with minor taxonomic differences (Fig. 6-34A). The
ova are slim and oval (see Fig. 6-34B) rather than spindle shaped, and all immature life
stages are narrower in D, cati than in D. canis. It is a rare disease that usually affects the
eyelids, the periocular area, the head, and the neck (see Fig. 6-30B and G).2l7 Lesions
are variably pruritic and consist of patchy erythema, scaling, crusting, and alopecia. It is
the localized type of demodicosis and is usually self-limited. Feline demodicosis may also
occur as a ceruminous otitis externa.v" Lime sulfur solution or mild parasiticides used for
ear mites can be used to treat the lesions. Amitraz in mineral oil (1:9) is an effective otic
miticide; it has not, however, been approved for use in cats.
Generalized feline demodicosis is rare and not usually as severe as the canine
form. 213. 221, 225 Cases may be more common in purebred Siamese and Burmese cats. 225
Lesions are found primarily on the head but may be on the neck, the trunk, and the
limbs, The lesions consist of circumscribed macules and patches with alopecia, scaling,
erythema, hyperpigmentation, and crusting. Some cats develop generalized lesions, Pruritus is variable. In two cases, large numbers of mites were found in scrapings of the ear
canal of healthy cats. 214 Generalized demodicosis due to D. cati is usually associated with

FIGURE 6-34. A, Adult Demodex cati
in skin scraping. It is similar to D, canis,

except for a somewhat slimmer abdomen,
(Courtesy J. Georgi.) B, D, cati ovum in
skin scraping. It is slim and oval rather
than spindle shaped. (Courtesy J. Ceorgi.)
C and D, Derrwdex gatoi in skin scraping
from a cat. This mite is morphologically
similar to Demodex criceti, which is found
on hamsters. Note blunt, rounded abdomen,

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 475

underlying disease: diabetes mellitus.v" feline leukemia virus infection, systemic lupus
erythematosus, hyperadrenocorticism, feline immunodeficiency virus infection, or squamous cell carcinoma in sitU. 188 , 210, 213, 218, 223, 226 In some cases, no underlying cause can be
found. One case had raised exudative lesions on the lips and chin. 208 Mites and a
Staphylococcus organism were obtained, and the cat had a marked lymphopenia associated
with long-term therapy for a respiratory tract infection. Clinicians should be aware of its
possible association with serious systemic disease. Histologic examination reveals varying
degrees of perifolliculitis and folliculitis, with mites in hair follicles (Fig. 6-35).
Some cats respond in a short time spontaneously with mild remedies such as topical
lime sulfur dips, carbaryl shampoos, malathion dips, and rotenone.v" 221 The apparent
ease with which generalized demodicosis can be treated in some cats may be explained by
the often superficial location of mites in the skin of cats as compared with that in the skin
of dogs. Treatment with amitraz dips at 125 ppm or 250 ppm on a weekly basis also can
be beneficial. 96a , 212
The second species of mite causing feline demodicosis is Derrwdex gatoi, and it bears
a close taxonomic resemblance to Derrwdex criceti, which is found in the epidermal pits in
the stratum corneum of hamsters. 215 , 220, 224 The mites affecting cats are shorter and have
broad, blunted abdomens (see Fig. 6-34C and D), unlike the slim, elongated abdomens
of D, cati.211, 220 They are superficially located and inhabit only the stratum corneum. In
non pruritic cats, skin scrapings reveal numerous mites and ova, the latter being indicative
of rapid reproduction.P" Because of their small size and translucency, the mite can be
overlooked if the slide is scanned rapidly with the four-power objective at full light
intensity. The lO-power objective should be used, and the iris diaphragm should be closed
down to increase the contrast. In pruritic cats, especially those that lick their skin, no
mites may be seen. 209 In these cases, a contact cat at home should be examined because
the mite is contagious 221, 222 or a therapeutic trial should be started.
The clinical signs of disease due to D. gatoi may be suggestive of feline scabies or
allergic skin disease, with severe pruritus; alopecic, scaly, excoriated, and crusted lesions
are seen, often concentrated on the head, the neck, and the elbows. Other cases have
multifocal erythema and hyperpigmentation, with broken, stubby hairs located on the
proximal rear legs, the flanks, and the ventral abdomen. Some are cases of symmetric
alopecia with or without scaling (see Fig. 6-30D), which mimics feline symmetric alopecia, psychogenic alopecia, or hypersensitivity reactions.
Histologically, minimal inflammation is observed. The epidermis may be irregularly
acanthotic and hyperkeratotic, with mites in the stratum corneum (Fig. 6-36). No mites
are found in the hair follicles.

FIGURE 6-35. Feline demodicosis. Interface mural folliculitis
and Demodex cati mites in the hair
follicle,

476 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-36. Feline demodicosis. Demodex gatoi (arrow) in
the surface keratin layer.

Differential diagnosis of the second type of feline demodicosis must include all feline
dermatoses that are associated with excessive grooming such as psychogenic alopecia,
atopy, food hypersensitivity, feline scabies, contact dermatitis, flea bite hypersensitivity,
and the demodicosis caused by D. cati. Careful skin scrapings are paramount in the workup for each of these conditions to make a proper diagnosis. Because the mite can be
difficult to find in cats that groom excessively, a short therapeutic trial with lime sulfur is
indicated before complicated testing like dietary restriction is undertaken. If the cat has
demodicosis, a positive response should be seen after three treatments.
Because D. gatoi is contagious, all cats in the household should be treated simultaneously. Although ivermectin has been suggested as an effective treatment.v" most investigations use lime sulfur dips weekly for 4 to 6 weeks. 209. 222. 223 Amitraz dips, 125 to 250
ppm, are also effective.P"
The third, presently undescribed, Derrwdex mite from the cat superficially resembles
D. gatoi, but is larger and possesses other anatomical differences.v'< 215
Canine Scabies

Canine scabies (sarcoptic mange) is a nonseasonal, intensely pruritic, transmissible infestation of the skin of dogs caused by the mite Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis (Fig. 6-37). The
mite is transferable to other species. 228• 241 Recent molecular analyses support the conspecilicity of Sarcoptes mites, and indicate that this genus consists of a Single heterogeneous
species. 250 a

Cause and Pathogenesis
The causative mite belongs to the family Sarcoptidae, as does Notoedres cati, the cause of
feline scabies. Because these mites have much in common, their 17- to 21-day life cycles
are presented together. Copulation of adults occurs in a molting pocket on the surface of
the skin. The fertilized female mite excavates a burrow through the horny layer of the

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 477

FIGURE 6-37. Adult Sarcoptes scabiei
var. canis. Note the long unjointed stalks and
suckers.

skin at a rate of 2 to 3 mm/d and lays eggs in the tunnel behind her. The eggs hatch as
larvae and burrow to the surface of the skin, where they travel about feeding and
eventually resting in a molting pocket. Nymphs also wander about the skin, but they may
stay in the molting pocket until they are mature. Mites prefer skin with little hair, so they
are most common on the ears, the elbows, the abdomen, and the hocks. As the disease
spreads and hair is lost, they may eventually colonize large areas of the host's body. The
entire life cycle may be complete in only 3 weeks.
Adult mites are small (200 to 400 JLm), oval, and white with two pairs of short legs
anteriorly that bear long unjoined stalks with suckers (see Figs. 6-37). The stalks are of
medium length in N. cati (see Fig. 6-44). Two pairs of posterior legs are rudimentary
and do not extend beyond the border of the body. The posterior legs carry long bristles,
not suckers, although the fourth pair of legs of the male mite have suckers. The anus of
S. scabiei var. canis is terminal, whereas that of N. cati has a dorsal location-an
important point of differentiation.
Scabies mites have hosts of preference but can cause disease in other species. S.
scabiei var. canis is known to cause disease in cats, foxes, and humans." 237, 244 Likewise,
dogs can be infected by mites from foxes and possibly even humans.F" Reactions in
humans occur within 24 hours after brief direct exposure and are characterized by pruritic
papules on the trunk and arms (Fig. 6-38D). Pruritus is severe, especially when the skin
is warm - as it is in bed at night or after a warm shower. Mites burrow but usually
remain on the aberrant host for only a few days. The lesions regress spontaneously in 12
to 14 days, if only a few mites were transmitted and contact with affected dogs is
terminated. However, with many mites and prolonged repeated contact, the human lesions persist for long periods. Canine Sarcoptes mites can live on human beings for at

478 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-38. A, Generalized erythema and alopecia of dog with extensive scabies. B, Margin of the ear (pinna)
is a characteristic site. C, Grayish crusts on the body mimic seborrheic dermatitis. Hemorrhagic area is from skin
scraping (positive). D, Crusted papules on human skin (forearm), the typical lesion of canine scabies in humans. E,
Pinnal alopecia, scale, and crust in an early case of feline scabies. F, Chronic feline scabies. Note marked crusting
and excoriation on pinnae and head. G, Dry, crusted lesions on the edges of the ears and face are typical of feline
scabies. H, Spider bite. Focal area of necrosis and slough in the Hank of a dog.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 479

least 6 days and produce ova during that time. 240 There is one report, however, of a child
with Norwegian scabies caused by S. scabiei var. canis. 245 Similar mites were found on
three dogs in the household and on all other members of the family.
The off-host survival time of scabies mites depends on the relative humidity and
temperature. Female mites and nymphs generally survive longer than do male mites or
larvae, and low temperature and high humidity prolong survival.F" At 10° to 15°C (50 to
59°F), female mites and nymphs could survive for 4 to 21 days, depending on the
humidity.P'? At room temperature (20° to 25°C, 68° to 77°F), all stages can survive for 2
to 6 days. These mites can be point sources of infection for other animals. 35. 127

Clinical Features
The distribution pattern of canine scabies typically involves the ventral portions of the
abdomen, the chest, and the legs. 236. 241 The ears and the elbows, favorite habitats of
mites, are almost always affected and are premiere places for obtaining diagnostic scrapings (see Fig. 6-30E to H). However, some animals have no ear lesions. The disease
spreads rapidly and can involve the entire body (see Fig. 6-38A), but the dorsum is
usually spared. Alopecia is present, and early skin lesions are characteristic. These are
pruritic, reddish papulocrustous eruptions (see Fig. 6-30F). Typically, they have thick
yellowish crusts, and the intense and constant itching soon produces extensive excoriation
(see Fig. 6-38B and C). These patients are miserable because they are constantly scratching themselves. Itching is thought to be more severe in warm environments (e.g., indoors
or by the stove). In long-term cases, hyperpigmentation of the affected skin is common.
Most patients also have a generalized lymphadenopathy.
The incubation period for scabies is unknown. When fox mites were transferred to
dogs, there was a lag period of 6 to 11 days before signs developed, and those were
mild. 233 In the natural situation, infested dogs should start to itch a few days after
infection. The pruritus is at a low level and is proportional to the number of mites. As the
number of mites increases, the pruritus becomes more severe, but there is some point at
which the pruritus explodes in severity. Typically, the intense pruritus develops 21 to 30
days after exposure. In experimental studies, infected dogs seroconverted 2 to 5 weeks
after infection and 1 to 3 weeks after clinical signs developed.F" If these data are coupled
with the more rapid seroconversion and self-cure of dogs at reinfection, it is clear that the
intense pruritus of scabies is due to hypersensitivity to the mite. 230, 234, 235, 250
Some dogs never have the classic lesions of scabies. They scratch incessantly and have
few, if any, real lesions other than mild erythema and occasional excoriations. They are
often treated for an allergy with systemic corticosteroids but without benefit. These dogs
have had scabies ever since they came in contact with an infected dog or environment,
but mites are not found in skin scrapings. Thorough grooming may have removed superficial mites and crusts, so only a few mites remain-enough to cause pruritus but too few
to find. These dogs respond rapidly and dramatically to proper antiscabies therapy.
In cats, S. scabiei infestation is rare and variable in clinical presentation (Fig.
6_39).219, 244 There are pruritic pinnal and facial papules; severe pododermatitis with or
without claw abnormalities; generalized crusts, scale, and pruritus; and self-induced hair
loss with no skin lesions, Temporary transmission from cats to humans has been reported.
Affected cats are often immunosuppressed before infestation.

Diagnosis
Scabies mites can be difficult to demonstrate, especially when the patient is intensely
pruritic, has had the disease for a long time, or has received multiple baths or dips.
Scabies should be considered in any dog with nonseasonal, intense pruritus, especially
when the pruritus does not stop with the administration of 1.1 mglkg of prednisone.
However, nearly 30% of dogs may respond to steroid treatments.F" When scabies is a
differential diagnostic possibility, it can be excluded only by the animal's failure to respond
to adequate treatment.
A helpful, although nonspecific, test for scabies is the pinnal-pedal reflex. The edge of
the dog's pinna is rubbed or scratched and the test is positive if the dog's hindleg
attempts to scratch the ear region. Between 75% and 90% of dogs with scabies and ear

480 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-39. Scabies. Digital
crusting, onychogryphosis, and onychorrhexis in a cat with Sarcoptes
scabiei var. canis infection. (Courtesy H. P. Huang.)

lesions have a positive pinnal-pedal reflex.243 The test may be negative if no ear lesions are
present. Because hypersensitivity to the mite appears to be important in the pruritus of
scabies and mites of various species may share some cuticular or fecal antigens, reports on
the diagnostic accuracy of skin testing with house dust mite antigen have arisen. In one
study of 20 dogs with scabies, 15 showed positive intradermal and serologic reactivity to
house dust mites that was lost when the scabies was treated.F" The authors have only
been able to show dust mite reactivity in approximately 30% of their cases. 243 Testing with
a Sarcoptes suis extract resulted in approximately 30% reactivity in infected dogs in one
study.231 The serodiagnostic rate in these dogs also was approximately 30%.
The absolute confirmation of the diagnosis necessitates that some stage of the mite or
its feces be seen via skin scrapings. Multiple scrapings are necessary. For scraping, one
should choose skin sites that have not been excoriated. In these areas, one should look for
red, raised papules with yellowish crusts on top (see Fig. 6-38C). The ear margins, the
elbows, or the hocks are primary scraping sites because the mites seem to prefer these
areas. Large amounts of material are collected and spread on slides with mineral oil, and
every field should be examined carefully. One mite, one egg (Fig. 6-40), or dark brown
oval fecal pellets (Fig. 6-41) are diagnostic. Depending on the number of scrapings taken,
mites may be seen in only 20% of cases.243 A few patients have mites in the feces. An
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test exists for the diagnosis of scabies and is
reported to be 92% sensitive and 96% specific,235 although some studies report a much
lower rate.F" Seroconversion can take up to 5 weeks after inoculation, so testing should
not be performed too early.
Histologic examination may be useful but is rarely conclusive, unless actual mites are
seen in the biopsy specimen. One should always select an active papule, undisturbed by
excoriation, as the biopsy specimen. Mites may rarely be found in the superficial epidermis and the stratum corneum (Fig. 6-42). Early on, histopathologic changes are minimal.
In developed cases, approximately 50% of biopsies have marked spongiosis and a perivascular-to-interstitial, heavily eosinophilic dermatitis.P'" A very suggestive histopathologic clue
is the presence of focal areas of epidermal edema, exocytosis, degeneration, and necrosis
(epidermal "nibbles") (Fig. 6-43). Eosinophils vary in number, from few to many, probably relative to recent glucocorticoid therapy. Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis is often
pronounced.
Differential diagnosis should include contact dermatitis, atopy, food hypersensitivity,
Malassezia dermatitis, Pelodera dermatitis, cheyletiellosis, otodectic dermatitis, and dirofilariasis. Anyone of these dermatoses at a particular stage might resemble scabies. Failure

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 481

FIGURE 6-40. Multiple S. seabiei ova in skin scraping.

to find mites should not eliminate the diagnosis of scabies, and doing so is a common
mistake. Many such cases are erroneously treated as an allergy. Careful history, physical
examination, or appropriate cultures, biopsy, and examination of scrapings, and especially
response to acaricidal medicaments, usually satisfactorily resolve the diagnostic problem.

Treatment
Although dogs develop an immunity to the scabies mite, which can lead to spontaneous
resolution, the condition does not resolve spontaneously in all dogs, so eradication of the
mites is indicated.P" Treatment should be started as soon as the diagnosis is made or
suspected. This disease is highly contagious in a kennel or a hospital. The only licensed
method of treatment for canine scabies is the repeated application of a topical parasiticide,
If the dog has a dense coat, the hair should be clipped. All patients should be bathed with
an antiseborrheic shampoo to remove crusts and other debris, and then an acaricidal dip
should be applied thoroughly and allowed to soak every inch of the skin surface. Spot
treatment is ineffective. Particular care should be taken around the ears and the eyes; the

FIGURE 6-41. S. scabiei fecal
pellets (scybala) in linear arrangement in skin scraping.

482 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-42. Canine scabies.
Note mite segments within stratum
corneum.

skin in those regions is often severely infected yet delicate and easily irritated by parasiticidal dips. Administration of systemic corticosteroids in full antiallergic dosages (1.1 mglkg
of prednisone or prednisolone daily) for 2 to 3 days is useful to provide relief from
scratching and to stop self-mutilation until the mites are eliminated.
Many of the proven scabicides are no longer available for veterinary use, and mite
resistance to some pesticides, especially the organophosphates, has been suggested. These
problems limit the number of dips available, and no topical treatment can be considered
100% effective. Weekly administration of lime sulfur, organophosphate, or permethrin
dips can be effective. Amitraz is reported to be an effective agent when used at 250 ppm
once to three times at 2-week intervals.P'" Other reportedly effective topicals include
fipronil spray and herbal treatments.P" 239 Regardless of which treatment is selected, it
should be used until the pruritus is vastly reduced or eliminated. Typically a 4- to 6-week
course of treatment is satisfactory.
Topical treatments are very labor intense, especially when the dog has a dense coat.
The owner's physical abilities or the dog's lifestyle, for example, swims daily, sometimes

FIGURE 6-43. Canine scabies.
Hyperplastic perivascular dermatitis
with focal epidermal necrosis and exocytosis ("nibbles").

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 483

eliminates this route of treatment. High-dose ivermectin or milbemycin can be effective in
these cases. 6 , 35 Because of the expense of milbemycin, ivermectin receives widest use but
cannot be used in ivermectin-sensitive breeds.' Ivermectin is given at dosages of 0.2 to 0.4
mglkg subcutaneous twice at 14-day intervals or orally three times at 7-day intervals. The
pour-on formulation applied twice at 14-day intervals at a dosage of 0.5 mglkg is also
effective. 248 One 0.2 mglkg dose of doramectin given subcutaneously or intramuscularly
reportedly is 100% effective. 244a
Milbemycin oxime has been used as an alternate oral treatment for dogs sensitive to
high-dose ivermectin. At dosages below 3 mglkg, adverse reactions in any breed of dog
are very rare.l!" In the initial clinical study, dogs were given 2 mglkg either twice at 14day intervals or three times at 7-day intervals, and all dogs were cured. 246 Another group
of 56 dogs were treated with the three-dose protocol, and a 29% failure rate was
reported.F" Additional treatments were needed to cure the failures. If milbemycin is used,
the owner should be asked to report after the third dosage. If the dog is still pruritic,
additional treatments should be dispensed and these will result in cure. 263
Recent studies indicated that two applications of selamectin at a 30-day interval cured
93% to 100% of the cases of canine scabies.f" and that fipronil spray was also curative.F"
Most cases of scabies in a single-pet household can be resolved by treatment of the
animal alone. In multiple-dog households, all contact dogs should be treated, even if they
exhibit no signs, because asymptomatic carriers have been identified. Because the parasite
can live in the environment for up to 21 days, cleaning and applying an environmental
pesticide may be indicated." This is most important when numerous mites are found on
scraping, especially when multiple dogs are involved.
Humans who do not have lesions at the onset of treatment of the dog should not
develop any. If lesions were present, they may persist for 7 to 14 days, but new lesions
should not develop. Development of new lesions indicates inadequate treatment of the
dogs, environmental infestation, or true human scabies, which could have been transferred
to the dogs. The owners should be referred to a human dermatologist.

Feline Scabies
Feline scabies (notoedric mange) is a contagious parasitic disease of cats caused by N.
cati.

Cause and Pathogenesis
N. cati (Fig. 6-44) primarily attacks cats but may also infect foxes, dogs, and rabbits." 252
It causes transient lesions in humans. The mites are obligate parasites that probably
survive off the host for only a few days. The disease is highly contagious by direct contact,
and characteristically affects whole litters and both sexes of adult cats. Affected animals

FIGURE 6-44. Adult Notoedres cati. Note
the medium-length stalks, the striated integument, and the lack of a terminally located anus,
The mite is smaller than S. scabiei vaL canis.

484 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
have large numbers of mites, which are easily found on skin scrapings. 252 Notoedric
mange appears in epizootics; it is rarely diagnosed in some parts of the country but is
endemic and common in others.
The mite belongs to the family Sarcoptidae, and because its basic life cycle and
structure are similar to those of canine scabies, the two are discussed together in the
section entitled Cause and Pathogenesis of Canine Scabies. The main features of taxonomic differentiation for the clinician are that N. cati mites are smaller than Sarcoptes
canis and have medium-length unjointed sucker-bearing stalks on their legs. They also
have more body striations and, most important, have a dorsal anus as compared with the
terminal anus of Sarcoptes,' The abundant mites are much easier to find on skin scrapings
than they are in cases of S. canis.

Clinical Features
The distribution is typical. Lesions first appear at the medial proximal edge of the pinna
of the ear (see Fig. 6-38E). They spread rapidly to the upper ear, the face, the eyelids,
and the neck (see Fig. 6-38F and G). They also extend to the feet and the perineum.
This probably results from the eat's habits of washing and of sleeping in a curled position.
Female mites burrow into the horny layer of the epidermis between hair follicles.
These burrows appear on the skin surface in the center of minute papules. The skin soon
becomes thickened, wrinkled, and folded and later is covered with dense, tightly adhering,
yellow to gray crusts (see Fig. 6-38G). There is partial alopecia in affected areas. Intense
pruritus develops, and the excoriations produced by scratching may become secondarily
infected. As the disease progresses, the hair loss and skin lesions spread until large areas
of the body are involved. Peripheral lymphadenopathy is usually present.
Diagnosis
The distribution of lesions and the intensity of the pruritus are highly suggestive. Identification of the mites is diagnostic. Scrapings should be examined with the lO-power objective with reduced light because the mites are small and become less visible with intense
light. The differential diagnosis should rule out Otodectes infection, cheyletiellosis, atopy,
food hypersensitivity, pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Histopathologic study reveals varying degrees of superficial perivascular or superficial
interstitial dermatitis (hyperplastic or spongiotic), Mite segments may be found within the
superficial epidermis (Fig. 6-45). Eosinophils vary in number from few to many, probably
reflecting recent glucocorticoid administration. Focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis is usually
pronounced.
Treatment
Many parasiticidal agents are contraindicated because of extreme toxic effects in cats.
Sulfur in various forms is usually safe. With the cat under sedation, the hair is clipped, if
necessary, and the cat is bathed in warm water and soap to loosen scales and debris. A
2% to 3% warm water solution of lime sulfur should be applied and allowed to dry on the
skin. The dip is repeated every seventh day until the condition is resolved. Six to eight
treatments may be necessary. All cats on the premises must be treated, because cats in
preclinical stages of the disease might be carriers. The response to treatment is usually
rapid and complete if all cats are thoroughly treated and re-exposure is prevented.
Amitraz as used in demodicosis can be effective. Ivermectin given subcutaneously twice or
thrice, or one subcutaneous dose of doramectin at 0.2 to 0.3 mglkg is effective." 250b. 251

SPIDERS
Spiders are arachnids that inhabit woodpiles, old buildings, and refuse areas. The four
species of spiders that are medically important in the United States are the black widow
(Latrodectus mactans), the red-legged widow (Latrodectus bishopi), the brown recluse
(Loxosceles reclusa), and the common brown spider (Loxosceles unicolor).254, 258
Spider bites occur most commonly on the forelegs and the face. Bites of spiders of

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 485

FIGURE 6-45. Histopathologic section of cat skin with
three N. cati mites in the stratum corneum. The arrow
points to the central mite. Note extensive acanthosis, hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, prominent rete ridges, and infiltration of inllammatory cells in the superficial dermis.
(Courtesy B. Bagnall.)

the genus Latrodectus (the widows) initially consist of two small puncture marks with local
erythema. The local reaction may develop into granulomatous nodules within a few days.
Bites of spiders of the genus Loxosceles (the brown spiders) initially appear as puncture
marks surrounded by local erythema.F" Within a few hours, they become vesicular and
painful. The next day, the lesions tum black and become necrotic, and a large indolent
ulcer develops (see Fig. 6-38H). Skin biopsy reveals a nodular to diffuse necrotizing
dermatitis and panniculitis (Fig. 6-46).
Systemic reactions to spider bites may be severe. They may be manifested by salivation, nausea and diarrhea, ataxia and convulsions, or paralysis, any of which occur within 6
to 48 hours. Generalized urticaria can result from the ingestion or bites of less venomous
spiders.
Although spider bites are rarely recognized and reported, they are probably underdiagnosed in veterinary medicine.F" Diagnosis should be based on history and the physical
examination findings. An extremely painful local swelling should increase the suspicion of
spider bite. 256 Recommended early bite wound therapy includes local infusion with 2%
lidocaine and triamcinolone acetonide.F" Systemic support with the administration of
analgesics, calcium gluconate, and epinephrine and glucocorticosteroids may be needed. In
the case of bites of Latrodectus spp., the local infusion of 1 ml of antivenin is recommended.F" Chronic ulcers may take months to heal and may be best treated by surgical
excision.
The numbers of spiders can be controlled by cleaning up woodpiles and outdoor sites;
by eliminating scattered debris; and by spraying insecticides under appliances, in cupboards, in cracks in basement and attic floors, and outdoors under eaves and in window
wells and woodpiles.

486 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-46. Spider bite, histologic view.
Nodular area of necrotizing dermatitis and panniculitis,

Insects
The numerous species of insects play important roles in the health of animals as vectors
of disease and as irritants to the skin.2 • 10 Insect's heads bear appendages and sensory
organs, such as antennae and simple or compound eyes. The structure of the masticatory
mouthparts varies, depending on the feeding habits. The thorax typically carries two pairs
of wings and three pairs of legs. The abdomen is segmented and terminates in the male
hypopygium or the female ovipositor. The body is encased in hard chitinous plates
connected by flexible membranes.
The life cycles of insects are of three types: direct development, incomplete metamorphosis, and complete metamorphosis. In the first type, the newly hatched insect is a small
replica of the adult. Incomplete metamorphosis occurs in primitive insects, and the larvae
differ from adults in size, proportion, and lack of wings. Complete metamorphosis is
found in more specialized species. The wormlike larva differ from the adult in regard to
feeding habits. After several molts, the larva pupates and emerges as an adult. The larva
and the pupa possess characteristic hairs, bristles, and appendages, which are of taxonomic
importance. The duration of adult pupal and larval stages varies with the species and the
environment.
Insects have medical importance because of the damage they can do to the skin and
because their stings, bites, or body parts can be allergens. Insect hypersensitivity, aside
from flea bite hypersensitivity, has received much attention and helps explain the severe
skin reactions to seemingly trivial bites." Equally as important, insects seem to be a source

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 487

of inhaled allergen for some dogs or cats with atopy-like conditions. These animals have
the classic signs of atopy but either show no intradermal or serologic reactions to common
inhaled allergens or do not respond to immunotherapy. Ants, moths, houseflies, butterflies, and cockroaches are probably important as strictly inhaled allergens. Mosquitos,
biting flies, and honeybees can cause disease through both their bites and the inhalation
of their body parts. Hypersensitivity to these insects can be documented by intradermal
tests. 3, 318 It remains to be seen how effective immunotherapy can be.

PEDICULOSIS
Pediculosis is infestation with lice (Fig. 6-47A).
Cause and Pathogenesis

Lice are small, degenerate, dorsoventrally flattened, wingless insects that do not undergo
true metamorphosis. The eyes are reduced or absent, and each leg bears one or two
claws. There is one pair of spiracles on the mesothorax and usually six pairs on the
abdomen. Lice are host specific and spend their entire life on their host. They survive
only a few days if separated from the host. Lice are spread by direct contact or by
contaminated brushes, combs, and bedding. The operculated white eggs (nits) are cemented firmly to the hairs of the host. In contrast, Cheyletiella ova are smaller and loosely
attached to the hair shafts (see Figs. 2-28Y and Z). The nymph hatches from the egg,
undergoes three ecdyses (molting), and becomes the adult. The entire cycle lasts 14 to 21
days.
Lice are divided into two suborders: Anoplura, or sucking lice, and Mallophaga, or
biting lice.

Anoplura
These have mouthparts adapted for sucking the blood of the host. With heavy infestations,
they produce sufficient anemia to cause weakness, and some animals become distraught
and ill-tempered because of the chronic irritation. The only species found commonly on
dogs is Linognathus setosus (Figs. 6-48A and 6-49C).

Mallophaga
These so-called biting lice feed on epithelial debris and hair, but some species also have
mouthparts adapted for drawing blood from their hosts. Because they are active, they may
cause more irritation than do sucking lice, and rubbing by their host may cause alopecia.
Trichodectes canis (see Fig. 6-49A) is the common biting louse of dogs. It may act as the
intermediate host of the dog tapeworm, D. caninum.' Felicola subrostratuas infests cats
(Fig. 6-50; also see Fig. 6-48B) and may either be asymptomatic or cause severe
pruritus with dermatitis and hair loss on the back. Heterodoxus spiniger may be found on
dogs in warm climates only (see Fig. 6-49B). A single case of Phthirus pubis (human
pubic louse) infesting a dog has been reported. The dog, which had no clinical signs, slept
in the bed of its owner, who was infested with the louse.P"
Clinical Features

Lice can be highly irritating to the host and can cause intense itching. They accumulate
under mats of hair and around the ears and body openings. Sucking lice produce anemia
and severe debilitation, especially in young animals. Sucking lice do not move rapidly and
are easily seen and caught (see Fig. 6-47A). Biting lice, however, move rapidly and may
be difficult to find and capture.
Lice produce a few direct lesions, but excoriations and secondary dermatitis from
scratching may be severe. Pediculosis may look like miliary dermatitis in cats and like flea
bite hypersensitivity in dogs. Papules and crusts may be found (see Fig. 6-47B). Debilitated, anemic, and frustrated patients are often ill-tempered and difficult to handle. The
patient's coat is often dirty, matted, and ill-kept, as this is a disease of neglect often
associated with overcrowding and poor sanitation. The animal has a mousy odor, especially
when wet.

488 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-47. A, Multiple louse nits on the head of a dog. (Courtesy J. King.) B, Multiple erythematous,
crusted papules on the back of a dog with pediculosis. C, Stages of life cycle of the flea (from left to right): Adult
female with egg, adult male, mature larva ready to pupate (white), young larvae after first blood meal (red).
Legend continued on opposite page

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 489

FIGURE 6-48. A, L. setosus, adult male. B, F. subrostrata, egg-bearing female.

In some cases, animals are asymptomatic carriers or have only seborrhea sicca with
variable pruritus. Pediculosis is often more prevalent in the winter months, perhaps owing
to the growth of longer, heavier haircoats and closer contact among animals. In addition,
the high ambient and skin surface temperature during summer can be lethal to lice.
Pediculosis is a rare diagnosis in most veterinary practices. Lice are easily killed by
common flea shampoos, sprays, or powders; consequently, owners usually eliminate these
parasites with routine grooming care. More insecticidal shampoos are used today than
were used many years ago, and louse infestation has decreased proportionately.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is made by physical examination to find and identify the lice. The acetate tape
impression method of immobilizing lice for identification is described in Chapter 2.
Differential diagnosis of pediculosis should include seborrhea, scabies, flea bite hypersensitivity, cheyletiellosis, and Dermanyssus, Lynxacarus, or Trombicula infestations. Skin
scrapings and acetate tape examinations should resolve any diagnostic questions. Histopathologic examination reveals varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis (hyperplastic or spongiotic). Eosinophils are usually prominent.

FIGURE 6-47. Continued. The pupa is not illustrated. D, Empty flea egg cases (lower right), young yellowwhite larvae (upper left), and blood fecal crusts from adult fleas to be used as larval food. E, Erythematous
papules on the abdomen of a dog with flea-bite hypersensitivity. F, Sticktight fleas (Echidnophaga gallinacea) on
the face of a dog. (Courtesy G. Kunkle.) G, Multiple crusted papules on the margin of the pinna of a cat with
European rabbit flea infestation. (Courtesy R. Harvey.) H, Multiple ulcers due to Tunga penetrans on the
metacarpal pad of a dog. (Courtesy J. King.)

490 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-49. Dog lice. A, Trichodectes canis. B, Heterodoxus
spiniger. C, Linognathus setosus.
(From Lapage G: Monnig's Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology, 5th ed. Williams & Wilkins
Co., Baltimore, 1962.)

Treatment
All affected animals and other animals in close association with them should be treated.
Thick mats and hair tags should be clipped away. After a regular soap and water shampoo,
the animal should be soaked or sprayed thoroughly with a good insecticide. Lice are
susceptible to almost all parasiticidal agents. Ivermectin was reported to be effective when
given at 0.2 mglkg subcutaneously once. 262

Cats
Cats can be treated with pyrethrin or carbamate shampoos. Mter being dried, cats can be
sprayed or dusted with products containing pyrethrins. Treatment should be repeated
within 10 to 14 days, because not all the nits may be killed and any that remain will have
hatched by that time. Two percent lime sulfur dips are also effective. Fipronil spray
should be effective.P'< 258a
Dogs

Stronger medications with residual action can be used on dogs, although lice are easily
killed with the preparations noted above. Bathing the dog with a shampoo containing
synergized pyrethrin or a pyrethroid is effective. Dogs can then be dipped or sprayed with
any residual flea dip or fipronil. 101b . 259, 261 Imidacloprid was reported to be effective against
T. canis (biting) and L. setosus (sucking) infestations on dogs. 261a
It is advisable to clean bedding, the premises, and grooming implements thoroughly
at least once, even though lice do not live long when they are off the host.

FLEAS
Fleas are small, brown, wingless insects with laterally compressed bodies (Fig. 6-51).
Male fleas are smaller than female fleas, and the chitinous head bears antennae, eyes,

FIGURE 6-50. Felicola subrostrata, egg-bearing female. On the left is an intact egg; on the right, an
empty case.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 491

FIGURE 6-51. Ctenocephalides
felis felis adult.

combs, and suctorial mouthparts. The prothoracic and genal combs are useful taxonomically. Each segment of the three-sectioned thorax bears a pair of powerful legs terminating in two curved claws. The structure adapts fleas for powerful jumping, which enables
them to transfer from host to host. Because of their dependence on the host for protection and food, fleas spend their entire adult life on the host or other contact animals. 275
There are more than 2000 species and subspecies of fleas worldwide. Although dogs
and cats could be transient hosts for virtually any species of flea, only Ctenocephalides
felis, C. canis, Pulex spp., and Echidnophaga gallinacea are of medical concern in most
pets. The rabbit flea, Spilopsyllus cuniculi, is problematic in some parts of Europe and
Australia.P" 313
Worldwide, Ctenocephalides spp. are of greatest medical concern. Surveys on fleainfested dogs and cats have shown that C. felis felis is the most common species, with
prevalence figures of greater than 92% in dogs and 97% in cats. 30 , 31, 273, 280, 292 C. canis is
far less common but can be the predominant species.s"? E. gallinacea, the sticktight
poultry flea, can occasionally infest pets, especially in warm climates.P" For transfer to
occur, the pet's environment must be or have been occupied by birds. Pulex irritans, the
human flea, is an uncommon finding on most dogs. Given the choice between infesting
humans or dogs, P. irritans appears to prefer the dog but transfers from the dog to
contact humans. Because P. irritans may be important as a plague vector, the infestation
of pets may have some public health significance.
Fleas develop by complete metamorphosis from the egg to the adult through three
larval stages and one pupal stage. Details of the life cycle are illustrated in Figure 6-47C.
The biology of only C. felis felis has been well described, and developmental data may not
apply to other species. The female flea lays her eggs on the host and usually while the
dog or cat rests or sleeps. These eggs are ovoid, white, and 0.5 mm in length. Because
they are not sticky, the eggs fall from the host into the environment, where the life cycle
is completed. Development is independent of the host's presence but is dependent on the
macroenvironmental and microenvironmental conditions. Ambient temperature and relative humidity are critical for the flea's development and its timing. Because of their
negative phototactism and positive geotropism, flea larvae move deep into carpets, down
cracks in wood floors, and under the soil surface or organic debris outside.P?" In these
protected environments, the local temperature and humidity can be different from
those of the gross environment and the life cycle can be completed more rapidly than
expected.

492 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
All stages of the flea are sensitive to environmental conditions.v? In general, temperatures between 20° and 30°C with a relative humidity of less than 70% are ideal. Except at
very high (greater than 35°C) or very low (less than 8°C) temperatures, relative humidity
is more critical for survival. For example, 50% of flea eggs will hatch at 35°C with a
humidity of 75%, but none hatch if the humidity is reduced to 33% or 50%. Provided that
the temperature does not fall below or exceed the viable limits of the flea, variations of
temperature slow or accelerate development. For example, at a humidity of 75%, 50% of
larvae pupate within 34 days when the temperature is 13°C, whereas 80% pupate within 8
days at 32°C. In warm climates, such as north-central Florida, cat fleas survive outdoors
all year round, even surviving light frosts in protected microhabitats such as inside a
doghouse or under a mobile home. 296a
Flea eggs usually hatch in 1.5 to 10 days.275. 310 Low temperatures (less than O°C) for
24 to 36 hours are lethal to most eggs. Newly hatched larvae move to dark protected
areas, where they feed on organic debris, other larvae, and most important, adult flea
feces (see Fig. 6-47D). Larvae are capable of moving over 40 em in carpet. Two molts
are completed before the third larval instar enters the pupal phase. The larval phase is
completed in 5 to 10 days if sufficient food is available and the climate is ideal. Larvae are
the Achilles heel of the flea, and outside of the laboratory, less than 25% usually survive."? Dryness (less than 33% relative humidity), high heat (greater than 35°C), and
extreme cold (less than 8°C) are lethal to the larvae in a short period of time.
At the end of the larval phase, the third instar produces a silklike cocoon in which
pupation occurs. If the larva is disturbed, it can develop as a naked pupa which decreased
its chances of survival slightly. At 80% humidity and 27°C, adult cat fleas can start to
emerge in 5 days. Peak emergence occurs at day 8 to 9. The pupal stage is more resistant
to desiccation than other stages but will die at the temperature extremes (3°C or less;
35°C or higher). Emergence is not automatic but depends on the presence of appropriate
stimuli, especially temperature and physical pressure. Without the proper stimulus, the
adult flea can remain in the cocoon for as long as 140 days. These pre-emerged adults can
emerge rapidly when the proper stimulus occurs, leading to a massive explosion in the
number of fleas.
In most households, C. felis felis takes 3 to 4 weeks to complete its life cycle, with
extremes of 12 to 174 days recorded. 30-32 The newly emerged adults require a host for
long-term survival. Under standard household conditions, most nonhosted, nonfed adult
fleas do not survive after 12 days. Elevations in temperature or reductions in humidity
hasten the unfed fleas' death. If the fleas have fed for a few days before separation from
the host, they die much more rapidly in the environment. If fleas are not removed from
the host, they can survive for more than 100 days.
The female flea starts egg production 24 to 36 hours after her first blood meal. As
long as the female is not removed from the host, reproduction will continue for over 100
days, although the fecundity decreases with increasing time. Production varies, with peaks
of 40 to 50 eggs per day recorded. Under environmental conditions that allow a 21-day
life cycle, one mating female flea who lays 20 eggs per day, 50% of which hatch to
females, can be responsible for an infestation of more than 20,000 adults and more than
160,000 preadult forms in 60 days.
The biology of E. gallinacea is slightly different. After copulation, the female flea
burrows into the skin, where the eggs are laid. The eggs hatch on the host, but the larvae
fall into the environment, where the remainder of the life cycle is completed.P"
Ctenocephalides canis is the most common flea isolated from dogs in Ireland and
Greece. 267, 297 The ideal temperature and relative humidity for the development of C.
canis are 25°C (77°F) and 75%, respectively. When reared on cats, C. canis did not
develop beyond the first larval stages.
Most species of fleas move freely around their host's body and can be found virtually
anywhere. E. gallinacea has a preference for the facial region (see Fig. 6-47F). During
feeding, the flea releases material into the dermis to prevent blood clotting. S. cuniculi,
the rabbit flea, has a preference for the pinna and periauricular areas (see Fig. 6-47G).
Tunga penetrans burrows into the skin and produces significant damage at the site of
attachment (see Fig. 6_47H).285,305

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 493

FIGURE 6-52. Flea bites on the legs of a girl. The back is
another commonly affected area when the sofa is infested.

The flea's saliva contains a variety of substances that can be irritating or allergenic
(see Fig. 6-47E). Signs associated with flea feeding are variable and depend on the
number of fleas present, the tolerance of the host for skin irritation, and most important,
the presence or absence of hypersensitivity to the flea saliva (see Chap. 8). Nonallergic
individuals can harbor variable numbers of fleas with little or no clinical response to them.
These animals are at risk for a blood loss anemia. Seventy-two female fleas can consume a
total of 1 ml of blood per day. All animals, but especially those of small size, can lose a
considerable amount of blood per day when they are heavily infested. However, the
irritant nature of the flea's bite is usually somewhat protective for the animal. As the flea
population increases, the animal's grooming behavior or scratching increases, which dislodges the flea and decreases the population feeding at anyone time. Aside from the
blood loss and skin damage they cause, fleas are intermediate hosts for the tapeworm
Dipylidium caninum and can be vectors for Rickettsia typhi, R. felis, Bartonella hinselar,
and various infectious agents.277.304 With heavy infestations, the owner will be bitten (Fig.
6-52).

FLEA CONTROL
Fleas are ubiquitous and, depending on the climate, can cause a seasonal or nonseasonal
problem for pets and their owners. Any animal that contacts other dogs or cats, frequents
grooming parlors or kennels, or is exercised in areas open to other pets or wildlife should
be considered exposed. Preventive environmental and animal treatments can minimize or
abort more serious problems. Measures discussed later can be both prophylactic and
therapeutic, but need to be used much more vigorously when the pet and its local
environment are heavily infested. Prevention is the key to good flea control.
Although fleas have a finite life span; often are groomed off and swallowed, especially
by cats; and have a decreased reproductive efficiency when feeding on an allergic animal,288.3OO they cannot be ignored and do not go away by themselves. Control necessitates
routine regular treatment of all pets in the house, the house, and the yard. Effective on-

494 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
animal treatments can eventually eliminate environmental fleas provided that untreated
animals do not reinfest the area. 275d Poor treatment in anyone area, especially the house,
can make the whole program unsatisfactory. Most programs employ the use of pesticides
on the animals and in their environment.
Most pesticides have some residual activity, and levels can build up in the animal and
its environment with repeated use. It is paramount that the veterinarian be aware of all
pesticides used on the animal and its environment.P-" If the same type of insecticide
(e.g., organophosphate) is used on both the pet and the environment, intoxication can
result from absorption from both sites.
External Environment

Because flea eggs fall to the ground, the infested pet's yard can be seeded with fleas by
the pet itself or by stray dogs, cats, or feral animals.F'" 310 Feral animals, especially
opossums and raccoons, are a very common point source of infestation for a yard. Fleas
can survive the winter in the animal's burrow.P" During the spring and summer, the flea's
rate of reproduction increases as the animal starts to roam through neighborhoods at
night. As the animal stops at a garbage can or under a deck, it drops flea eggs into the
environment and can pick up some adult fleas to worsen its own infestation. Eggs
dropped into the yard mayor may not develop. Flea larvae are sensitive to heat and
desiccation. Relative humidities below 50% and temperatures above 35°C (95°F) are lethal
to flea larvae. Accordingly, adults should not develop on paved areas, on deck surfaces, or
in short-cut, sun-exposed lawn. Eggs that fall in protected areas (e.g., under decks, in
crawl spaces, and in tall vegetation) can develop. All woodlands and uncultivated fields
should be considered infested.
Obviously, the most effective outdoor treatment is prevention, but yards visited by
untreated pets or feral animals will need treatment. The first and most environmentally
sound step in outdoor flea control involves restriction of the pet from the trouble spots.
Crawl spaces, areas under decks, and garden areas should be fenced off, and pets should
not be allowed to roam in woods or fields. Exercise in short-cut, sun-exposed fields is
allowed. Areas that cannot be avoided by the pet should be cleaned of organic debris
frequently and treated with a pesticide registered for outside use. Powder, liquid, and
granular formulations of carbamates or organophosphates are available. 30 - 32 Nonmicroencapsulated liquids have a shorter residual action than do the powder or granular formulations. Recently, a novel biopesticide system for outdoor flea control has been marketed
(Interrupt, Veterinary Product Laboratories). This product contains harmless nematodes
called Steinemema carpocapsae, which kill flea larvae and pupae in the grass and SOil. 3 11
The efficacy of this system is not known.F"
A commonly overlooked outdoor point source of infestation is the family vehicle. If
the pet travels with the family, the vehicle can be seeded with eggs. It is ill-advised to
apply a residual pesticide inside the vehicle. Fumes that could develop when the vehicle
sits in the sun with the windows closed could make the passengers ill. The vehicle should
be vacuumed thoroughly and frequently. If a pesticide is necessary, only short-acting, lowtoxicity agents (e.g., pyrethrin) should be applied. The vehicle should be well ventilated
before use.
Internal Environment

The house is usually most difficult in the flea control process, especially if the household
has multiple pets. Although the infestation is heaviest in areas where the pets rest, any
area that is traversed or casually visited must also be treated. If cats are present, virtually
every square foot of the house can be infested.
Thorough cleaning is mandatory. Vacuuming with a powerful machine equipped with
a beater bar can reduce the flea burden Significantly by removing some eggs, larvae, and
adults, and by stimulating pre-emerged adults to emerge. All areas should be vacuumed,
but special attention should be paid to the furniture, the floor beneath the furniture, the
baseboard areas, and all carpets, especially those with a long nap. The vacuum should be
emptied after the cleaning. Carpet cleaning can be beneficial. Steam kills larval stages, but

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 495

most nonprofessional steam cleaners do not produce true steam. Carpet temperatures
from these machines may be too low to kill larvae. Even if the cleaning is not larvicidal, it
removes organic debris and flea feces, the foodstuff of the larvae. One drawback to carpet
cleaning is that the local humidity in the carpet can be increased to the ideal flea level for
days to weeks. Any newly deposited eggs or missed pre-emerged stages may accelerate
their development because of this environmental improvement. Accordingly, cleaned carpets should be treated with a pesticide. During the cleaning phase, the pet's bedding
should be washed or replaced. Preliminary information suggests that flea traps may be of
some benefit, but environmental ultrasonic devices are of no use.F"
Unless the household is devoid of carpets and upholstered furniture, pesticides are
necessary. Owners have the choice of applying the agents themselves or hiring a professional. Professional services probably costs more but, when owners put a dollar value on
their time and realize that most professional services use products not available to the
general public and usually include retreatment visits in the initial price quote, professional
treatment becomes cost competitive. An added advantage is that professional treatment
can last longer. 269 If professional services are employed, the owner should provide the
clinician with the names of the products used to ensure that they are compatible with the
animal products being administered.
Health and environmental concerns have led to the use of various nontraditional
pesticides, especially sodium borate. The borate compounds have rapid ovicidal and larvicidal activity, probably through a dehydrating mechanism. Ingested crystals also kill larvae.
Owner-applied and professionally applied products are available. The professionally applied product (Rx for Fleas, Inc.) is guaranteed for 1 year, provided that the carpets are
not cleaned, and has a reported efficacy of greater than 99%.30-32
Most homeowners want to attack the flea problem themselves, and a wide variety of
pesticides and methods of delivery are available. Whatever plan is developed, it must
address the displaced adult flea, the pre-emerged adults, and all the immature forms.
Insecticides with little residual action, so-called quick kill products, have no place in a flea
control program as the sole agent, except for spot treatment of trouble areas such as the
pet's sleeping area. Products selected should be either residual insecticides or quick kill
products coupled with an insect growth regulator. Because of health and environmental
concerns and local variations in pesticide regulations from state to state and nation to
nation, the numbers and types of household pesticides change from year to year. Products
available last year, especially those containing organophosphates, may not be available this
year. In general, most environment products now contain pyrethrins or pyrethroids, which
necessitate inclusion of a growth regulator.
Insect growth regulators prevent the pupation of flea larvae.v- 30. 37, 41, 282. 294, 309 If
these products are applied in the house before fleas are introduced, infestation should be
aborted. Methoprene is degraded by sunlight and should be reapplied at least every 30
weeks. Fenoxycarb and pyriproxyfen are sunlight stable and last 6 to 12 months. When
the household is already infested, growth regulators alone are not sufficient.
A wide variety of insecticide plus growth regulator products are available through
veterinarians, pet stores, and other outlets. The insecticide kills displaced adult fleas and
some pre-emerged adults provided that the cocoon is saturated, whereas the growth
regulator prevents larval development. However, because neither component affects larvae
that have just pupated and some pre-emerged adults probably do not emerge during the
period of activity of the insecticide, fleas may be seen in the house shortly after the
treatment. If the house was massively infested, fleas can be expected in 5 to 14 days30 - 32
and retreatment with a quick kill insecticide is necessary. If the infestation was mild, this
retreatment may not be necessary.
The most common complaint heard when owners treat their house is that the product
did not work because they continue to see fleas. Although this apparent failure may be a
result of insect resistance to the parasiticide.s? the continued infestation most likely results
from poor application and not an inferior product. Thorough treatment of a house takes a
great deal of time and effort, and most uneducated owners apply the products incorrectly.
Perhaps the biggest setback in good flea control was the development of the fogger.

496 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
The advertisements for these products have stressed their ease of use but not their
drawbacks. These room aerosols treat unnecessary areas (e.g., tabletops) and miss vital
spots (e.g., under furniture, in room comers, and in closets). These problems are magnified when the owner uses only the number of foggers necessary to cover the number of
square feet of the house with no regard to intervening walls and passageways, which
interrupt aerosol dispersion.
The most effective methods of indoor flea control involve hand-directed spraying of
the pesticide. Products are available in aerosol cans, hand-operated sprays, and concentrates for dilution and application via hand-pressurized spray tanks. If large areas are to be
treated, hand-operated sprays are the poorest method of delivery because hand fatigue
occurs. The spraying should start in the center of the room and work toward the walls. All
trouble spots (e.g., under furniture) should be sprayed carefully. Foggers can be used to
decrease the amount of spraying necessary in large rooms. After the comers of the rooms
and trouble spots are hand sprayed, a well-designed fogger can be discharged to cover
unobstructed areas.
Owners should be instructed to follow the manufacturer's directions carefully. Specific
schedules for retreatment should be developed and followed. This is often the weak link
in the program. Many clients postpone retreatment until new fleas are seen. At this point,
the fleas are established, and retreatment is much more labor intensive and expensive.
Fleas orient and move toward a light source, even more so when the light source is
suddenly and temporarily interrupted (which mimics the shadow cast by a passing
host).275a Cat fleas are most sensitive to light with a wavelength between 510 to 550 nm
(green light). Intermittent light traps collect over 86% of the fleas released into a 3 X 3 m
carpeted room within 20 hours, whereas nonblinking commercial flea traps collect less
than 14% of released fleas.275a
Animal

None of the available flea eradication products for animal use is 100% effective in killing
fleas over the entire time till the next application. Hence, good environmental control to
limit the number of fleas reaching the animal is needed. Another problem with these
products is that their residual efficacy under field conditions can be far shorter than that
found in the laboratory. In dogs who swim frequently, most topical products have no
residual effect. Accordingly, the best pesticide to use in any particular situation is one that
satisfies safety concerns and has limited restrictions on its use. Products that indicate some
frequency of application but allow use as necessary give the veterinarian maximal flexibility.
Ideally, all dogs and cats in the household should be treated with the same vigor,
even if only one animal has problems. Failure to treat the other animals, especially if they
are allowed to roam outside, is a point source of infestation for the troubled pet via
environmental seeding of eggs. In households with a large number of pets, most owners
do not treat the apparently unaffected animals with the same vigor as they do the allergic
ones. The owners should be encouraged to use the most effective method of control on
the normal animals that their situation allows.
All animal flea control programs should be designed to prevent all flea bites. The
number of fleas in the environment plus the owner's willingness and ability to do the
treatments determine whether the goal is achievable. The key is regular use of the
product. Haphazard use of an excellent product gives poor results. Before the specifics of
a program are designed, the owner should be questioned about what he or she can do on
a regular basis. Product selection is based on the owner's constraints. Despite the utmost
care, some flea control programs do not perform as expected, especially in multiple animal
households. At the onset of any control program, therapeutic monitoring with a flea comb
is indicated to determine if the agents selected are effective and, if so, what the optimum
frequency of application should be. The animal is combed once or twice weekly, and if
fleas or flea dirt are seen before the next scheduled application of product, the timing of
application is changed. If fleas are still found after the modification, there is some fatal
flaw in the program and it should be reevaluated in its entirety. Regular use of a flea
comb can decrease flea populations on shorthaired animals. A thorough, 1O-minute combing can remove up to 81% of the fleas from shorthaired dogs. 275b

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 497

Since the last edition of this text, flea control has been revolutionized with the
marketing of long-acting residual products. The safety, ease of usage, and efficacy of these
products is so high the use of conventional products almost seems like malpractice. However,
in households with large numbers of dogs, cats, or both, the new products can be too
expensive for some owners to use on all of their pets and a more conventional program must
be designed. The discussion on conventional products follows that of the newer products.

Spot Application Produas
Spot application products contain an insecticide in a proprietary vehicle. The product is
applied to one or two spots over the animal's dorsum, and the vehicle with its admixed
insecticide diffuses in a concentration-dependent manner over the animal's entire body.
The various products' technical information indicates the rate of coverage varies from 12
to 72 hours. Available products include imidacloprid, fipronil, selamectin, or permethrin as
their insecticide.
Imidacloprid (Advantage, Bayer) is marketed in various size tubes containing different
volumes of a 9.1% w/w solution. It is licensed for both dogs and cats. The target dosage is
10 mglkg, which is achieved by using a larger volume in animals with a greater body
weight. Imidacloprid is strictly an insecticide with no activity against ticks or other arachnids. Company data show that efficacy is achieved within 12 hours of application and
persists for 30 days. Efficacy figures vary from 95% to 100% depending on the species
and week after application. The efficacy starts to decline as the time to reapplication
approaches. According to the manufacturer, weekly immersion in water or a cleansing
bath at day 4 after application has little effect on residual effectivity. Contact dermatitis
has occasionally been seen at the site of application in both cats and dogs. Squames
impregnated with imidacloprid drop off into the environment and are larvacidal.P'" Because of this, environmental control can, at times, be achieved with the topical application
of imidacloprid to pets. 275b • 281a
Various studies in dogs 20 , 264. 289, 290, 299a and cats 290• 293, 295 corroborate the manufacturer's efficacy data. However, the authors and others have seen animals with a significant
flea burden within 14 days of application. These fleas could have been destined to die but
had not had sufficient time to do so or could indicate that the duration of action is
significantly less than 30 days in a subset of the population. Imidacloprid is at its highest
concentration directly after application and is bound to hairs and keratinocytes. If epidermal turnover is increased or hairs are lost, the surface concentration of imidacloprid will
decrease. Likewise, daily swimming, excessive licking, or frequent bathing, especially with
medicated shampoos, would be expected to reduce the surface concentration. Because the
efficacy and duration of action are dose dependent.P" it should not be surprising that
some animals will need more frequent application. The authors have heard some investigators say that they tell all of their clients with pets with skin disease to apply imidacloprid every 14 days. Because this approach increases the cost of treatment, the authors
suggest that the rate of application be determined on an individual basis. Owners are
asked to flea comb their pets once to twice weekly and reapply product when needed.
Recent studies indicate that (1) imidacloprid exhibits Significantly and consistently greater
flea kill at 6, 12, and 24 hours than selameotin.F" and (2) fleas stop feeding within 3 to 5
minutes on imidacloprid treated dogs, but continue to feed during the first hour on
fipronil or selamectin treated dogs. 30 1a
Fipronil (Frontline, Merial) is available in a 0.25% spray or a 10% spot application
product (Top Spot). It is licensed for both dogs and cats. Fipronil is both an insecticide
and acaricide, and is effective against fleas, ticks, and mites. Fipronil is stored in the
sebaceous glands, and sebaceous secretion can replenish the skin surface supply.'! Suggested frequency of application depends on the environmental flea burden, sensitivity of
the animal to the bite of the flea, and the need to control ticks. Typically, fipronil is
applied monthly for maximum efficacy. Manufacturer's data indicate a 24-hour lag phase
to maximal efficacy with a 93% to 95% efficacy at the 30-day point. Because the sebaceous glands replenish the drug lost at the skin's surface, water immersion or bathing is
reported to have minimal impact on efficacy for at least 30 days. Toxicity may be seen if
animals (especially kittens, puppies, small breeds) are overdosed with fipronil spray.

498 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
Efficacy figures vary with the species examined, the formulation used, and whether
the home environment was natural or simulated. In the simulated home environment,
monthly application of the spot application product kept treated cats completely free of
fleas.284.291 In the clinical situation, efficacy figures vary from approximately 70% to 88%
for 30 day trialS.299. 307 If the evaluation point is extended to 60 days, the efficacy drops to
near 60%.306 With the spot application formulation, flea-free rates of 62%, 47%, and 28%
were noted in one study at 30, 60, and 90 days, respectively, after application.P" As with
imidacloprid, the authors have examined animals with significant flea burdens despite the
recent application of the fipronil spot application product.
It must be emphasized that neither imidacloprid nor fipronil (a) kill the majority of
fleas before they are able to consume some quantity of blood, or (b) provide a noticeable
repellent effect on fleas.265a. 275c. 301a Selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer) was reported to be
highly effective in the control and prevention of flea infestations in dogs and cats. 43a
Selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer) is a semisynthetic avermectin applied to the skin every
30 days for control of heartworms, fleas, ticks, select intestinal parasites, and some
nonfollicular parasitic mites. Transdermally absorbed product circulates in the blood and
concentrates in the sebaceous glands, where it is stored as a reservoir to replenish the
skin. In flea control, peak efficacy is not seen for 36 to 42 hours after application. The
product is reported to kill adult fleas, reduce egg production in fleas not killed, and have
an environmental larvicidal activity. Manufacturer's data show high efficacy (>97%) for all
of these claims.
Permethrin spot application products are available in veterinary (Defend Exspot Insecticide for Dogs, Schering-Plough) and over-the-counter formulations. The concentration of
the permethrin varies from 45% to 60% and some products also contain methoprine or
pyriproxyfen.t" These products are toxic to cats, and no dog and cat contact should be
allowed until the product is completely dry. Frequency of application depends on the
product with figures ranging from 7 days to once monthly. Efficacy figures vary with
product and range from 81% to 90% with weekly application. 39. 271
Flea Collars

Flea collars are available to kill fleas (e.g., insecticidal collars), repel fleas (e.g., ultrasonic
devices), or kill flea eggs laid on the animal (e.g., growth regulator collars). Ultrasonic
collars are of no value.F" Under ideal situations, insecticidal collars can reduce the flea
burden by 50% to 90% but do not eliminate it.278.298 For the pet that is allergic to fleas,
reduction probably is not sufficient and the insecticide in the collar can preclude the use
of other similar products. Insecticidal collars should be reserved for contact animals,
especially free-roaming cats, when the owner does not routinely use other methods of
control. Collars containing methoprene or pyriproxyfen with or without an insecticide are
available. These are environmental control agents applied to the animals' body. Pyriproxyfen can kill adult fleas, but both agents are aimed at sterilizing the eggs that the flea
lays.33 The methoprene collars inhibit 94% to 99.5% of egg development for over 130
days.16. 301 Manufacturer's data suggest 100% efficacy for the pyriproxyfen collar for over 1
year.>'
A noninsecticidal device was released on the European market: the Catan Dog's tag.
It was marketed as a non-chemical and nontoxic method to control flea infestations.
Product literature claimed efficacy approaching 90% during the first few months that the
tag was worn. The tag was claimed to become activated and to produce some type of
square-wave field that repelled or eliminated fleas and ticks. However, studies conducted
in the United States demonstrated that the tag had no effect on adult fleas, egg production, or egg viability.275e
Flea Shampoos or Cream Rinses

Insecticidal shampoos are excellent grooming products but have a limited place in a
serious flea control program. With correct use (e.g., 15-minute contact time), the shampoos will kill the fleas on the animal's body. In one study, a deltamethrin shampoo killed
100% and 95% of the fleas and ticks, respectively, and provided more than 95% residual
activity for 2 to 3 weeks.F" It remains to be seen if the residual activity would be similar

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 499

in the clinical situation. Because the bathing must be followed by the application of some
other insecticide, one must question the use of most flea shampoos. They often cost more
than grooming products and have been known to cause reactions, so they cannot be
considered an innocuous part of the program.
Insecticidal cream rinses are available and claim residual activity against fleas for up to
7 days but their true efficacy is unknown.

Flea Powders
Flea powders contain talc and various insecticides and repellents. Effective application
puts the product on the skin, where it can have prolonged residual activity if it is not
removed. Powders have limited applicability in animals with dense undercoats, short coats,
or significant areas of hair loss. Because the talc absorbs sebum, repeated application of
powder dulls the coat and dries the skin. Many powders have been reformulated with
higher concentrations of active ingredients. Caution should be exercised when using these
stronger products, because too-frequent application can lead to a high residual concentration of insecticides. Very little powder is used today.
Systemic Flea Products
The only systemic flea control product available worldwide is lufenuron (Program, Novartis). It is given by mouth to dogs and cats once monthly or by injection every 6 months to
cats. The product concentrates in the animal's fat and is released from there so effective
blood levels are maintained for at least 30 days with the oral product. 15, 26. 43 As the flea
feeds, it absorbs the compound with the animal's blood and is passed in the flea's feces.
In female fleas, lufenuron sterilizes the eggs. Prehatched larvae that feed on the medicated feces will develop endocuticular defects and will die." The cytotoxicity of lufenuron
affects cuticle, epidermal cells, chorion, and vitelline membrane of unhatched larvae. 30 l b
Although lufenuron causes mortality in adult fleas-weakened endocuticle, decreased
resiliency of cuticle to expansion during blood feeding and egg production-this is only
seen after 7 days of continuous blood feeding at blood concentrations of more than 2
ppm. 273a These conditions are unlikely to occur in the clinical situation with recommended
use of lufenuron. Reported efficacy on lufenuron varies from study to study but exceeds
95% in all.21, 43, 268, 268a, 276, 279, 303, 312
The primary place of lufenuron in a flea control program is the prevention of an
indoor and outdoor environmental infestation, If the animal already has a few fleas and
some eggs have been layed, the lufenuron alone may be sufficient to control the situation
after 30 or more days, but most practitioners would add on adulticide to hasten the
response time.
Because the various adulticides described in this section usually are not 100% effective, the concurrent use of lufenuron or another highly effective growth regulator is
indicated to prevent the development of a strain of fleas resistant to the insecticide.
Until imidacloprid and fipronil were available, two systemic organophosphates received fairly wide usage, One product contained cythioate and was given by mouth twice
weekly, whereas the other contained fenthion and was applied to the skin for transdermal
absorption every 14 days. Although these products had some efficacy in flea control
programs, they were nowhere near as effective as the newer products and were removed
from the market in the United States."
Over the years, various lay products containing garlic, thiamine, brewers' yeast, sulfur,
and other natural ingredients have been touted as systemic flea repellents. 30 - 32 There is no
clinical evidence that these products are effective.
Liquid Products
Various proprietary, nonproprietary, and homemade liquid flea control products are used.
Although home remedies (e.g., Skin-So-Soft, Avon) can have some efficacy, data on other
commonly used products (e.g., pennyroyal oil) are not available and some, like tea tree oil,
can be toxic.P The proprietary products rarely contain a single active ingredient and
usually are mixtures of insecticides, repellents, and potentiators. Each product is labeled
for species and age range use and directions for its application. Intoxication can occur if

500 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
the animal is sensitive to one ingredient or if the label directions are not followed.F: 30
These products come in aerosol sprays, hand-pumped sprays, foams, and dips. As with any
other product, its efficacy is influenced by its formulation and how well it is applied,
Aerosol sprays are of no real use; the other modes of application have use in different
situations, Dips, or more appropriately rinses, are the most effective, in that a uniform
concentration of the product can easily be applied to the skin, regardless of the nature of
the haircoat. Drawbacks include the smell of the product, the tendency for dips to dry the
coat and the skin, the long drying time, and the limited number of products licensed for
cats, Because most cats hate repeated dippings, the limited number of products is of
minimal concern.
Hand-pumped sprays are basically prediluted dips that are usually more cosmetically
pleasing and expensive.P" Most animals can be dipped just as effectively with these sprays
as they can with traditional dips, but application time increases Significantly, This method
is ineffective in animals with dense undercoats, and many cats resent the use of sprays, If
an owner likes the spray method but finds the prepackaged products too expensive to use
regularly, the owner can be instructed to make his or her own spray from a dip concentrate, provided that the label instructions do not exclude this use, The owner purchases a
misting spray bottle and marks it clearly with a permanent marker, The dip's dilution
instructions are followed, but only that amount necessary to treat the animal or fill the
reservoir bottle is made. Some dips allow reuse of diluted emulsions, whereas other dips
make no reference to it or specifically prohibit it, In situations in which reuse of the dip is
prohibited, only that volume necessary to treat the animals should be made, These
homemade sprays have the odor and coat-drying problems of the dip, but their relatively
low cost may offset the disadvantages.
As mentioned earlier, fipronil is in both a spot application and spray formulation. The
spray formulation is just as hard to apply as a conventional product but its long duration
of activity makes it very valuable.P?
Flea foams (mousse) are special liquids that leave the can as a foam, which is applied
to the hair. As the foam is massaged into the coat, the bubbles burst and the liquid
reaches the skin. If the foam is applied correctly, the coat is left damp. This formulation is
of most value in small animals, especially cats, who resent the application of traditional
liquids. When it is used twice weekly, successful control can be expected in over 80% of
cats. 272

• DIPTERA (FLIES)
Medically, flies form a most important order of arthropods because they transmit or are
intermediate hosts for many bacterial, viral, protozoal, and helminthic disease agents.
However, their effects on skin are minor and are limited to bites (mosquitoes, stable flies,
black flies, and deer flies) and myiasis.
The reaction to insect bites varies, because some animals are less attractive or less
susceptible to certain flies. The local lesion is an irritant reaction that may become less
severe with repeated exposures. The systemic reaction to injected antigen, however, often
increases with repeated exposures (e.g., to bee and mosquito antigens), and severe local
edema or anaphylaxis may develop.
The primary lesion is a wheal or papule around a bleeding point (Fig. 6-53D). The
reaction may be transient or may persist for weeks. In the latter case, a pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia develops, with scaling and alopecia. A superficial and deep perivascular or
diffuse dermal infiltrate of eosinophils, plasma cells, and lymphocytes may be present.
Fly Dermatitis

Adult male and female stable flies (Storrwxys calcitrans) are peculiarly adapted for attacking the skin of the host and sucking blood.S 10 The rasping teeth and blades of the labella
tear open the skin, and the labella and whole proboscis are plunged into the wound to

FIGURE 6-53. A, Fly dermatitis on a German shepherd's pinna. Hemorrhagic crusts form from the
oozing blood and serum that result from the rasping mouthparts of stable flies (Storrwxys calcitrans). B, Collie
with folded ear shows extensive fly-bite lesions at the fold of the ear with secondary pyoderma. C, Multiple
erythematous fly bites on a dog's abdomen. D, Multiple ecchymotic black fly bites on the glabrous skin of a
canine abdomen. E, Myiasis. Moist exudative skin lesions attract flies. Note many white fly larvae on the
surface of skin and hair. F, Myiasis (Sarcophaga sp.) complicating otitis externa in a dog. G, Multiple
crateriform ulcers due to Cordylobia anthropophaga on the abdomen of a dog. (Courtesy J. Van Heerden.)
H, Cuterebra sp. larva protruding from a fistula in the ventral neck region of a cat (area has been clipped).

501

502 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
suck blood. The entire action is highly irritating to the host and conducive to spreading
disease.
The flies usually attack the face or the ears of dogs. The multiple bites are commonly
found on the tips of the ears (see Fig. 6-53A) or at the folded edge of the skin in dogs
whose ears are tipped over (such as Shetland sheepdogs and collies) (see Fig. 6-53B).
Erythema and hemorrhagic crusts, caused by oozing serum and blood, are typical lesions.
Pruritus varies from mild to severe, presumably reflecting the absence or presence of
sensitization. Affected dogs are always housed outdoors and are often confined so that
they cannot escape the fly attacks.
Ordinary fly repellents, flea products containing permethrin, or citronella in Vaseline
applied to the affected skin help prevent repeated bites.lv 39, 319 The patient should be
housed indoors during the day, if possible, until the lesions heal. Topical medications such
as antibiotic-corticosteroid ointment (Panalog) may be beneficial. The affected skin should
be kept clean and dry. The source of the flies should be investigated, and straw piles,
manure pits, and other likely areas can be sprayed with an insecticide.
Black flies (Simuliidae spp.) are tiny biting flies that reproduce in shaded areas with
running water. They are seasonal in early spring and summer and, during that time, cause
severe reactions in people and animals. Their bites are concentrated on hairless areas such
as the abdomen (see Fig. 6-53C), the head, the ears, and the legs (see Fig. 6-53D). The
lesions are intensely pruritic papules, crusts, and ulcers, with hemorrhage and severe
excoriation that result in circumscribed areas of necrosis. Some animals have highly
diagnostic annular, macular lesions characterized by a small, pinpoint puncture, surrounded by a larger blanched zone of edema, with a highly erythematous rim. Pruritus is
variable. Black flies tend to swarm, and animals bitten by a swarm can die (Fig. 6-54).
Histologically, black fly bites are characterized by a perivascular, predominantly eosinophilic, dermatitis with marked superficial dermal edema and purpura (Fig. 6-55). Horsefly (Tabanus), deer fly (Chrysops), and mosquito bites tend to be less reactive than are
black fly bites, but they are all diagnosed, managed, and prevented in the same way as
described for stable flies.
Mosquito Dermatitis

Most animals develop a pruritic papule only at the site of the mosquito's bite. Some cats
apparently are hypersensitive to some mosquito salivary antigen (see Chap. 8) and develop
a pruritic, erosive, crusting dermatitis of the bridge of the nose; papular to nodular lesions
on the pinnae; crusted papular pinnal lesions; or hyperkeratosis and swelling of the

FIGURE 6-54. Black fly bites.
Multiple lesions in a dog who was
swarmed and died as a result of the
bites. (Courtesy E. Clark.)

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 503

FIGURE 6-55. Black fly bite.
Perivascular, predominantly eosinophilic, dermatitis with marked superficial dermal edema and purpura.

pads. 315. 316, 319 Lesions resolve with or without treatment when the cat is isolated from
mosquitos and recur within 24 hours of new bites.
Histologically, the lesions are characterized by an eosinophilic interstitial to diffuse
dermatitis with or without intraepidermal eosinophilic microabscesses or nodular eosinophilic granulomas with collagen flame figures. Infiltrative and necrotizing eosinophilic
mural folliculitis is a common finding. Affected cats show positive intradermal test reactions to mosquito extracts.
Lesional resolution is hastened by the administration of glucocorticoids but may be
incomplete with continued mosquito feeding. Unless the cat tolerates repeated applications of insect repellents, management changes are necessary. Because mosquitos feed
primarily from dusk to dawn, the cat should be kept in a screened cage or room during
those hours.
Myiasis

Although maggots can have medical use,328 natural infection is detrimental to the patient's
health. The adult forms of many dipterous flies place eggs on the wet, warm skin of
debilitated, weakened animals with draining wounds or urine-soaked coats (see Figs.
6-53E and F).325 Animals that are attractive are not equally so at all stages to all flies. As
the skin breaks down and liquefies, it becomes a more ideal habitat to further attract a
second or third species of fly. Calliphorids (blowflies) feed on only dead tissue, whereas
sarcophagids (flesh flies) attack living tissue. 325 True screwworms, Cochliomyia hominovorax, have been eliminated from large areas of North America but exist in other areas.
They are obligate parasites of living tissue and are never common in dogs and cats. 322
Habronema larvae can rarely cause disease in animals housed near horses." Specific
identification is not important in the treatment of most myiasis cases. If necessary, larvae
can be kept until adult flies develop, or the posterior aspect of the larvae can be examined
for posterior spiracles and stigmal plates that are taxonomically significant.
The larvae found in cutaneous myiasis are highly destructive and produce lesions over
extensive areas with punched-out round holes (see Fig. 6-53G) in the skin." 317. 325 These
holes may coalesce to form broad defects with scalloped margins. The larvae may be
found under the skin and in the tissues (Figs. 6-56 and 6-57). Favorite locations are
around the nose, eyes, mouth, anus, and genitalia, or adjacent to neglected wounds (see
Figs. 6-53E and F). Severely infested animals may die of shock, intoxication, or infection. 325 Myiasis is always a disease of neglect.
Treatment necessitates clipping hair away from the lesions and cleaning them with an
antibacterial shampoo or wound flush. If the patient is stable, the diseased tissue should

504 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-56. Sarcophaga sp.
larva (arrow) surrounded by necrotizing dermatitis.

be surgically debrided. Larvae should be mechanically removed. Ivermectin (0.2 to 0.4
mglkg)327 or pyrethrin or pyrethroid sprays will kill any maggots that were missed. 325 Daily
routine wound care is necessary, and the patient should be housed in screened, fly-free
quarters. Usually, healing is rapid and complete, but one should also be concerned about
the original cause. Fecal or urinary incontinence, a continually wet coat, fold dermatoses,
or constant salivation or lacrimation, together with poor hygiene, can predispose the
animal to myiasis. These underlying factors must be corrected as a primary part of
therapy.
Some larvae, especially those of Cordylobia anthropophaga (see Fig. 6-53G), Dermatobia hominis, several species of Cuterebra (see later) and Wohlfahrtia, and possibly
Habronema spp., can penetrate normal skin and produce single to multiple nodular to
necrotic lesions.77, 320. 321, 323, 324. 326. 330 Dogs and cats can act as transport for flies via their
encysted larvae and introduce them to new countries. Treatment of individual lesions is

FIGURE 6-57. C. anthropophaga
larva surrounded by necrotizing dermatitis and panniculitis. (Courtesy J.
Van Heerden.)

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 50S

the same as that mentioned earlier. In situations in which repeated infection with Cordylobia can be expected, administration of high-dose ivermectin (0.4 mglkg) every third
week can prevent infection. 329
Cuterebra Species Infestation

Adult Cuterebra flies are large and beelike with vestigial mouthparts, but they neither bite
nor feed. They are not directly attracted to a host species but deposit eggs on stones or
vegetation near the entrance to the burrows or nests of animals to which they are
probably attracted at night. Animals become infested as they pass through areas contaminated with the eggs of Cuterebra spp. Larvae enter the body via natural body openings,
by skin penetration, or by ingestion as the animal grooms contaminated fur. 2 , lO,331 The
natural hosts are usually rabbits and other rodents, and in these animals, the parasites
exhibit host and site specificity.P" Rabbit Cuterebra are less host specific and usually
affect cats and dogs.
Because cats and dogs are abnormal hosts, the larvae undergo aberrant migrations
and have been reported in the brain, the pharynx, the nostrils, and the eyelids. 332, 333
Typical cases involving the skin are usually localized to the regions of the head, the neck,
or the trunk. Cases usually occur in late summer or fall, when the larvae enlarge and
produce a swelling of 1 em in diameter, which develops a fistula (see Fig. 6-53H).
Treatment involves incising or spreading the fistulous opening and extracting the grub
with a mosquito forceps. Care should be taken to avoid crushing the larva because
retained parts may produce allergic or irritant reactions. The infected wound should be
treated, but healing is slow.
Identification is usually possible because the second instar larvae are 5 to 10 mm in
length and cream to gray in color, with 10 to 12 visible body segments, the first 8 to 10 of
which are encircled by 3 to 4 rows of scattered dark spines and spinules. They have welldeveloped cranial mouth hooks but no head capsule or legs. Molting occurs, and the third
instar is the dark, thick, heavily spined larvae that the clinician sees in the subcutaneous
or submucosal pocket.

HYMENOPTERA (BEES, WASPS, AND HORNETS)
These venomous insects are not parasitic. They possess membranous wings and mouthparts for chewing, sucking, and licking. The ovipositor of the female insect is adapted for
stinging. The female insect has paired venom glands that express a toxin during the sting.
When bees and certain wasps sting, the tip of the abdomen and the whole poison
apparatus break off and remain in the wound. The gland may continue to express poison,
so the stinger should be removed from the skin as soon as possible, Other wasps and
hornets may sting repeatedly because they remain intact. Local redness, edema, and
inflammation soon develop, and in some animals, angioedema, anaphylaxis, or secondary
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia can occur. Intoxication is possible with a large number of stings. 303a, 334 If cardiac and respiratory impairment result, the patient may die.
Facial eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis has been described in dogs (see Chap.
8) and is thought to be due to the sting or bite of venomous insects, including bees,
wasps, hornets, flies, and ants.v 319, 335 Dogs have an acute onset of a pruritic papular to
nodular facial dermatitis.P" Lesions may be Single or multiple, are crusted, and may be
ulcerated if the patient traumatizes them. Grossly, the lesions cannot be differentiated
from those of other causes of folliculitis or furunculosis, but cytologic evaluation of the
exudate shows numerous eosinophils and no signs of infection. Histologically, an eosinophilic folliculitis or furunculosis is seen, often accompanied by areas of collagen flame
figures and mucinosis.P" Lesions resolve slowly without treatment. If the patient is pruritic, the administration of topical or oral corticosteroids hastens the resolution of the
lesions. The stinger should be removed, if it can be located. In severe cases with anaphylaxis, epinephrine should be given intramuscularly and glucocorticoids should be administered intravenously. If urticaria is present, epinephrine or large doses of prednisolone
followed by a rapid-acting antihistamine should be administered systemically. The applica-

506 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 6-58. Fire ant sting. Vertically oriented linear bands
of full-thickness dermal necrosis. (Courtesy P. Rakich.)

tion of cold compresses may relieve local pain. Subsequent bites or multiple bites make
the reaction more severe.

ANTS
The fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) is found in South America and the southeastern United
States.F" These ants inhabit urban and rural settings. When their nest is disturbed, they
swarm out, cover nearby objects, and deliver numerous stings. Fire ants attach themselves
by pinching skin with their mandibles; they then arch their bodies and inject venom
through an abdominal stinger. The venom is primarily composed of a unique alkaloid
(solenopsin A) that is cytotoxic and hemolytic.

FIGURE 6-59. Thaumetopoea
spp. caterpillar. (Courtesy J. P. Boutet.)

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 507

FIGURE 6-60. Urticarial and angioedematous lesions on the face of
a dog with caterpillar dermatitis,
(Courtesy L. Poisson.)

In dogs, the initial fire ant sting is painless, but it is followed within 15 minutes by
erythematous, pruritic swellings less than 1 em in diameter.P? These swellings enlarge to
be up to 2 em in diameter in about 6 hours; they then regress and disappear within 48
hours.
Histopathologic findings include vertically oriented, linear bands of full-thickness dermal necrosis with surrounding edema and numerous eosinophils (Fig. 6_58).337

CATERPILLARS
The caterpillar larvae of certain Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) can cause skin reactions.338.339 Such reactions are recognized commonly in dogs, rarely in cats, in the Mediterranean region of Europe. Pine and oak caterpillars (Thaumetopoea spp.) (Fig. 6-59)
are most frequently involved. Bristles from these caterpillars contain thaumatopine, which
causes mast cell degranulation and histamine release.
Animals (and humans) may be envenomated on direct contact with the caterpillars or
their nests, or by contact with airborne bristles. Most cases of skin reactions are seen in
the spring in young, curious dogs. Clinical signs include the sudden onset of facial
pruritus, urticaria, or angioedema (Fig. 6-60). The lips and muzzle are most severely
affected. In addition, the tongue is swollen and ptyalism is pronounced. In severe cases,
necrotic areas may develop in the skin and on the lateral and distal portions of the
tongue.
Therapy includes the use of glucocorticoids, antihistamines, and in severe cases,
epinephrine.

• REFERENCES
General
1. Bowman DO: Ceorgis' Parasitology for Veterinarians,
7th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999.
2. Foley RH: Parasitic mites of dogs and cats. Comp
Cont Educ 13:783, 1991.
3. Griffin CE: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity. In:
Kwochka KW, MacDonald JM (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1993, p 133.

4. Moriello KA: Common ectoparasites of the dog. Part
I, Fleas and ticks. Canine Pract 14:7, 1987.
5. Paradis M: Ivennectin in small animal dennatology.
Part I. Phannacology and toxicology, Comp Cont Ed
20:193, 1998.
6. Paradis M: Ivennectin in small animal dennatology.
Part II. Extralabel applications. Comp Cont Ed 20:
459, 1998.
7. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr, Griffin CEo Muller and

508 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W. B.
Saunders, Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
8. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1972-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
9. Sosna CB, Medleau L: Symposium on external parasites. Vet Med 87:537, 1992.
10. Soulsby EJL: Helminths, Arthropods, and Protozoa of
Domesticated Animals, 7th ed. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1982.

Antiparasitic Treatments
lOa. Beal MW, et al: Respiratory failure attributable to
moxidectin intoxication in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1813, 1999.
11. Birckel P, et al: Skin and hair distribution of 14cfipronil by microautoradiography following topical administration to the Beagle dog. J Vet Pharmacol Ther
20:155, 1997.
12. Bischoff K, Guale F: Australian tea tree (Melaleuca
altemifolia) oil poisoning in three purebred cats.
J Vet Diagn Invest 10:208, 1998.
13. Bossard RL, et al: Review of insecticide resistance in
cat fleas. J Med Entomol 35:415, 1998.
14. Brown M, Hebert AA: Insect repellents: An overview.
J Am Acad Dermatol 36:243, 1997.
14a. Cadiergues MC, et al: Efficacy of an adulticide used
alone or in combination with an insect growth regulator in simulated home environments. Am J Vet Res
60:1I22, 1999.
15. Dean SR, et al: Mode of action of lufenuron on larval
cat fleas. J Med Entomol 35:720, 1998.
16. Donahue WA, Young R: Assessing the efficacy of (S)methoprene collars against flea egg hatch on pets. Vet
Med 91:1000, 1996.
17. Dorman DC, et al: Fenvalerate/N, N-diethyl-m-toluamide (Deet) toxicosis in two cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 196:100, 1990.
18. Duncan KL: Treatment of amitraz toxicosis. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 203:1I15, 1993.
19. Folz SD, et al: Evaluation of a new treatment for
canine scabies and demodicosis. J Vet Pharmacol
Ther 1:199, 1978.
20. Franc M, Cadiergues MC: Antifeeding effect of several insecticidal formulations against Ctenocephalides
felis on cats. Parasite 5:83, 1998.
21. Franc M, et al: Pharmacokinetics of a new long-acting formulation of lufenuron and dose-activity relationship using experimental infestation by Ctenocephalides felis. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 20:80, 1997.
22. Franc M, Cadiergues MC: Susceptibility of the cat
flea, Ctenocephalides felis, to four pyrethroids. Parasite 4:91, 1997.
23. Frank LA, Kania SA: The effect of ivermectin on
lymphocyte blastogenesis and T-cell subset ratios in
healthy dogs. Vet Aller Clin Immunol 5:27, 1997.
24. Garg RC, et al: Pharmacologic profile of methoprene,
an insect growth regulator, in cattle, dogs, and cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:410, 1989.
25. Halliwell REW, Carlotti DN: Insect growth regulators: New products and new approaches for flea control on dogs. Prat M6d Chir Anim Comp 33:293,
1998.
26. Hink WF, et al: Evaluation of a single oral dose of
lufenuron to control flea infestations in dogs. Am J
Vet Res 55:822, 1994.
27. Hsu WH, Schaffer DD: Effects of topical application
of amitraz on plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:139, 1988.

28. Huguet C, et al: Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 57:1506, 1996.
29. Kawada H, Hirano M: Insecticidal effects of insect
growth regulators methoprene and pyriproxyfen on
the cat flea. J Med Entomol 33:819, 1996.
30. MacDonald JM, Miller TA: Parasiticide therapy in
small animal dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy 9. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 571.
31. MacDonald JM: Flea allergy dermatitis and flea control. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
P 57.
32. MacDonald JM: Flea control: An overview of treatment concepts for North America. Vet Dermatol 6:
121, 1995.
33. Meola R, et al: Toxicity and histopathology of the
growth regulator pyriproxyfen to adults and eggs of
the cat flea. J Med Entomol 33:670, 1996.
34. Miller TA, Blagburn BL: Ovisterilant efficacy of pyriproxyfen collars on dogs and cats. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol
12:63, 1996.
35. Moriello KA: Treatment of Sarcoptes and Cheyletiella
infestations. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XI: Small Animal Practice. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 558.
36. ~ueller RS, Bettenay SV: A'proposed new therapeutic protocol for the treatment of canine mange with
ivermectin. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:77, 1999.
37. Palma KG, et al: Mode of action of pyriproxyfen and
methoprene on eggs of Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med Entomol 30:421, 1993.
38. Rosenbaum MR, Kerlin RL: Erythema multiforme
major and disseminated intravascular coagulation in a
dog following application of a d-limonene-based insecticidal dip. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1315, 1995.
39. Ross DH, et al: Efficacy of a permethrin and pyriproxyfen product for control of fleas, ticks, and mosquitos on dogs. Canine Pract 22:53, 1997.
40. Schwinghammer KA, et al: Comparative toxicity of
ten insecticides against the cat flea, Ctenocephalides
felis. J Med Entomol 22:512, 1985.
41. Shaaya E: Interference of the insect growth regulator
methoprene in the process of larval-pupal differentiation. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol 22:233, 1993.
42. Shipstone MA, Masson KV: The use of insect development inhibitors as an oral medication for control of
the fleas Ctenocephalides felis, Ct. canis in the dog
and cat. Vet Dermatol 6:131, 1995.
43. Stansfielf DG: A review of the safety and efficacy of
lufenuron in dogs and cats. Canine Pract 22:34, 1997.
43a. Thomas CA: Revolution: A unique endectocide providing comprehensive convenient protection. Compend Cont Edu Pract Vet 21(Suppl): 2, 1999.
43b. Thomas CA: Revolution safety profile. Compend
Cont Edu Pract Vet 21(Suppl): 26, 1999.
44. Tranquilli JW, et al: Assessment of toxicosis induced
by high-dose administration of milbemycin oxime in
collies. Am J Vet Res 52:1I 70, 1993.
45. Turnbull GJ: Animal studies in the treatment of poisoning by amitraz and xylene. Hum Toxicol 2:579,
1983.

Hookworm Dermatitis
46. Bowman DD: Hookworm parasites of dogs and cats.
Comp Cont Educ 14:585, 1992.
47. Matthews BE: Mechanics of skin penetration by
hookworm larvae. Vet Dermatol Newsl 6:75, 1981.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 509

Pelodero Dermatitis
48. Bourdeau P: Cas de dennatite a rhabitides (Pelodera
strongyloides) chez un chien. Point Vet 16:5, 1984.
49. Horton ML: Rhabditic dermatitis in dogs. Mod Vet
Pract 61:158, 1980.
50. Pasyk K: Dermatitis rhabditidosa in an l l-year-old
girl. Br J Dennatol 98:107, 1978.
51. Smith JD, et aI: Larva currens; cutaneous strongyloides. Arch Dennatol 112:1161, 1976.

Strongyloides stercoralis-like Infection
52. Malone JB, et aI: Strongyloides stercoralis-like infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:130, 1980.
53. Mansfield LS, et aI: Ivermectin treatment of naturally
acquired and experimentally induced StrongylOides
stercoralis infections in dogs. J Am Vet Med. Assoc
20:726, 1992.

Anatrichosomiasis
54. Hendrix CM, et aI: Anatrichosoma sp. infection in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:984, 1987.

Schistosomiasis
55. Harmon RRM: Parasites, worms, and protozoa. In:
Rook A, et aI (eds): Textbook of Dermatology. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1979.
56. Hoeffier DF: Swimmer's itch. Cutis 19:461, 1977.

Dracunculiasis
57. Beyer TA, et al: Massive Dracunculus insignis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:366, 1999.
58. Giovengo SL: Canine dracunculiasis. Comp Cont
Educ 15:726, 1993.
59. Muhammad G: Dracunculus medinensis in a bull terrier (a case report). Indian Vet J 67:967, 1990.
60. Panciera DL, Stockham SL: Dracunulus insignis infection in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:78, 1988.

Dirofilariasis
61. Bredal WP, et aI: Adult Dirofilaria repens in a subcutaneous granuloma on the chest of a dog. J Small
Anim Pract 39:595, 1998.
62. Coles LD, et al: Adult Dirofilaria immitis in hind leg
abscesses of a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:363,
1988.
63. Elkins AD, et aI: Interdigital cyst in the dog caused
by an adult Dirofilaria immitis. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 26:71, 1990.
64. Mozos E, et aI: Cutaneous lesions associated with
canine heartworm infection. Vet Dennatol 3:191,
1992.
65. Scott DW: Nodular skin disease associated with Dirofilaria immitis infection in the dog. Cornell Vet 59:
233, 1979.
66. Scott DW, Vaughn TC: Papulonodular dermatitis in a
dog with occult filariasis. Comp Anim Pract 1:31,
1987.
67. Seavers A: Cutaneous syndrome possibly caused by
heartworm infestation in a dog. Aust Vet J 76:18,
1997.

Other Filarial Infections
68. Carmichael J, Bell FR: Filariasis in dogs in Uganda.
J S Afr Vet Assoc 14:12, 1943.
69. Cazelles C, Montagner C: Deux cas de filariose cutanee associee a une leishmaniose. Point Vet 27:343,
1995.
70. Gardiner CH, et aI: Onchocerciasis in two dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:828, 1993.
71. Hargis AM, et aI: Dermatitis associated with microfi-

lariae (Filioidea) in 10 dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:95,
1999.
72. Kamalu BP: Canine filariasis caused by Dirofilaria
repens in southeastern Nigeria. Vet Parasitol 40:335,
1991.
72a. Tarello W: La dirofilariose sous-cutanee a Dirofilaria
(Nochtiella) repens chez Ie chien. Revue bibliographique et cas cIinique. Rec Med Vet 150:691, 1999.

Miscellaneous Helminthic Infections
73. Amato JF, et aI: Two cases of fistulated abscesses
caused by Lagochilascaris major in the domestic cat.
Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 85:471, 1990.
74. Bate M, et aI: Gnathostoma spinigerum in a dog's leg.
Aust Vet J 60:285, 1983.
75. Bauer C, et aI: Taenia crassiceps metacestodes in the
subcutis of a dog. Kleintierprax 43:37, 1998.
76. Chermette R, et aI: Subcutaneous Taenia crassiceps
cysticercosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:263,
1993.
77. Chermette R, et aI: Quelques parasitoses canines exceptionnelles en France: III -cysticercose proliferative du chien a Taenia crassiceps: A propo de trois
cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:125, 1996.
78. Craig TM, et aI: Parasitic nematode (Lagochilascaris
major) associated with a purulent draining tract in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:69, 1982.
79. Dell'Porto A, et aI: Ocorrencia de Lagochilascaris
major Leiper, 1910 em Gato (Felis catus domesticus
L) no estado de Sao Paulo, Brasil. Rev Fac Med Vet
Zootec 25:173, 1988.
80. Hovorka I, Dubinsky P: Helminths of domestic dogs
and cats in the urban area of Kosice and the National
Park in the year 1992. Folia Vena 25:195, 1995.
81. Mog S, et aI: Subcutaneous migration of an adult
Paragonimus kellicoti in a dog from Wisconsin. Vet
Pathol 34:5, 1997.
82. Moisan PG, et al: Incidental subcutaneous gordiid
parasitism in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest 8:270, 1996.
83. Sanderson TP, et aI: Cutaneous habronemiasis in a
dog. Vet Pathol 27:208, 1991.

Parasitic Ticks
84. Atwell R, et al: The effect of fipronil on Ixodes holocyclus on dogs in Northern NSW. Aust Vet Practit
26:155, 1996.
84a. Barriga 00: Evidence and mechanisms of immunosuppression in tick infestation. Gen Anal Biomed Eng
14:139, 1999.
85. Barsanti JA: Botulism, tick paralysis and acute polyradiculoneuritis. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1980, p 773.
86. Blagburn BL, et aI: Efficacy of the preventic (9 per
cent amitraz) collar for control of Rhipicephalus sanguineus and Dermacentor variabilis infestations on
dogs. In: Proceedings of the 1993 North American
Veterinary Conference, Vol. 7, 1993, P 387.
86a. Estrada-Pefia A, Ascher F: Comparision of amitrazimpregnated collar with topical administration of fipronil for prevention of experimental and natural infestations by the brown dog tick (Rhipicephalus
sanguineus). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1799, 1999.
87. Rodriguez JM, Perez M: Use of ivennectin against a
heavy Ixodes ricinus infestation in a cat. Vet Rec 135:
140, 1994.
88. Searle A, et aI: Results of a trial of fipronil as an
adulticide on ticks (Ixodes holocyclus) naturally at-

5 I0 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
tached to animals in the Brisbane area. Aust Vet
Practit 25:157, 1995.
89. White SD, et al: Otobius megnini infestation in three
dogs. Vet Dermatol 6:33, 1995.

Dermanyssus gallinae
90. DeClerg J, Nachtegaele L: Dermanqssus gallinae infestation in a dog. Canine Pract 18:34, 1993.
90a. Nordenfors H, et al: Effects of temperature and humidity on oviposition, molting, and longevity of Dermanyssus gallinae (Acari: Dermanyssidae). J Med Entomol 36:68, 1999.
91. Ramsay GW, Mason PC: Chicken mite (D gallinae)
infesting a dog. N Z Vet J 23:155, 1975.
92. Tucci EC, Gnimaraes JH: Biology of De17nanyssus
gallinae (DeGeer, 1778). Rev Brasil Parasitol Vet 7:
27, 1998.

Lynxacarus radovsky
93. Bowman WL: The cat fur mite (Lynxacarus rhadoosky) in Australia. Aust Vet J 54:403, 1978.
94. Craig TM, et ale Lynxacarus rhadavsky infestation in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:613, 1993.
95. Foley RH: An epizootic of a rare fur mite in an
island's cat population. Feline Pract 19:17, 1991.
96. Pereira M: The cat fur mite (Lynxacarus radovskyi)
in Brazil. Feline Pract 24:24, 1996.

Trombiculiosis
96a. Beugnet F, Bourdeau P: Les ectoparasites du chat.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:427, 1999.
97. Fleming EJ, et al: Miliary dermatitis associated with
Eutrombicula infestation in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:529, 1991.
98. Greene RT, et al: Trombiculiasis in a cat. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 188:1054, 1986.
99. Lowenstine LJ, et al: Trombiculosis in a cat. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 175:289, 1979.
100. Nuttall TJ, et al: Treatment of Trombicula autumnalis
infestation in dogs and cats witb a 0.25 per cent
fipronil spray. J Small Anim Pract 39:237, 1998.

Otodectes cynotis
101. Bensignor E: Dermatite feline a Otodectes cynotis.
Point Vet 28:85, 1996.
lOla. Bourdeau P, et al: The probable role of environmental conditions in the efficacy of treatment of Otodectes cynotis infestation in dogs? An example with moxidectin (Cydectin) in 50 dogs. Proc Annu Cong Eur
Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 15:149,
1998.
101b. Bourdeau P, Lecanu JM: Treatment of multiple infestations with Otodectes cynotis, Cheyletiella yasguri,
and Trichodectes canis with fipronil (Frontline SpotOn: Merial). Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Group,
Autumn 1999, p 35.
1Ole. Coleman GT, Atwell RB: Use of fipronil to treat ear
mites in cats. Aust Vet Practit 29:166, 1999.
102. Faulk RH, et al: Effect of Tresaderm against otoacariasis: A clinical trial. Vet Med (SAC) 73:307, 1978.
103. Gram DB, et al: Treating ear mites in cats: A comparison of subcutaneous and topical ivermectin. Vet
Med 89:1122, 1994.
104. Harwick RP: Lesions caused by canine ear mites.
Arch DermatoI114:130, 1978.
105. Lopez RA: Of mites and man. J Am Vet Med Assoc
203:606, 1993.
106. Pappas C Jr, Katz TL: Evaluation of a treatment for
the ear mite, Otodectes cynotis, in kittens. Feline
Pract 23:21, 1995.
107. Powell MB, et al: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodec-

tes cynotis infestation of cats and mode of mite feeding. Am J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
107a. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Sensitization to dust
mites in cats with Otodectes cynotis infestation. Vet
Dermatol 10:89, 1999.
108. Scherk-Nixon M, et al: Treatment of feline otoacariasis with 2 otic preparations not containing miticidal
active ingredients. Can Vet J 38:229, 1997.
109. Vincenti P, Genchi C: Efficacite du fipronil (Frontline
spot on) dans Ie traitement de la gale des oreilles
(Otodectes cynotis) chez Ie chien et Ie chat. Proc
GEDAC 13:5, 1998.
110. Weisbroth SH, et al: Immunopathology of naturallyoccurring otodectic otoacariasis in the domestic cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 165:1088, 1974.

Pneumonyssoides caninum
111. Bredal W, Vollset I: Use of milbemycin oxime in the
treatment of dogs with nasal mites (Pneumonyssoides
caninum) infection. J Small Anim Pract 39:126, 1998.
112. Bredal WP: The prevalence of nasal mite (Pneumonyssoides caninum) infection in Norwegian dogs. Vet
Parasitol 76:233, 1998.
113. Bredal WP: Pneumonyssoides caninum infection: A
risk factor for gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs. Vet
Res Commun 22:225, 1998.
114. Bussieras J, Chermette R: Quelques parasitoses canines exceptionnelles en France: I-infestation par
Pneumonyssoides caninum. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 30:427, 1995.
115. Gunnarsson L, et al: Experimental infection of dogs
with the nasal mite Pneumonyssoides caninum. Vet
Parasitol 77:179, 1998.
116. Gunnarsson LK, et al: Clinical efficacy of milbemycin
oxime in the treatment of nasal mite infection in
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:81, 1999.
117. Marks SI, et al: Pneumonyssoides caninum: The canine nasal mite. Compend Cont Educ 16:577, 1994.
118. Mundell AC, et al: Ivermectin in the treatment of
Pneumonyssoides caninum. A case report. J Am Anim
Hasp Assoc 26:393, 1990.

Environmental Mites
119. Kunkle GA, et al: Dermatitis in horses and man
caused by the straw itch mite. J Am Vet Med Assoc
181:467, 1982.
120. Vollset I: Immediate type hypersensitivity in dogs induced by storage mites. Res Vet Sci 40:123, 1986.

CheyletieJlosis
121. Chadwick AJ: Use of 0.25 per cent fipronil pump
spray formulation to treat canine cheyletiellosis.
J Small Anim Pract 38:261, 1997.
122. Cohen SR: Cheqletiella dermatitis (in rabbit, cat, dog,
man). Arch Dermatol 116:435, 1980.
123. Foxx TS, Ewing SA: Morphologic features, behavior,
and life history of Cheyletiella yasguri. Am J Vet Res
30:269, 1969.
124. Lee BW: Cheyletiella dermatitis: A report of 14 cases.
Cutis 47:111, 1991.
.
125. McGarry JW: Recurrent infestation of a cat by Cheqletus eruditus (Shrank 1781). Vet Rec 125:18, 1989.
126. McKeever PJ, Allen SK: Dermatitis associated with
Cheyletiella infestation in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
174:718, 1979.
127. Moriello KA: Cheyletiellosis. In: Griffin CE, et al
(eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 90.
128. Ottenshot TRF, Gil D: Cheyletiellosis in long-haired
cats. Tijdsch Diergeneeskd 103:1104, 1978.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 5 I I
129. Paradis M, Vileneuve A: Efficacy of ivermectin
against Cheyletiella yasguri infestation in dogs. Can
Vet J 29:633, 1988.
130. Paradis M, et aI: Efficacy of ivermectin against Cheyletiella blakei infestation in cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 26:125, 1990.
131. Smiley RL: A review of the family Cheyletiellidae
(Acarina). Ann Entomol Soc Am 63:1056, 1970.
132. Stein B: Personal communication, 1982.

Canine Demodicosis
133. Barriga 00, et aI: Evidence of immunosuppression
by Dernodex canis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:
37, 1992.
134. Barta 0, et aI: Lymphocyte transformation suppression caused by pyoderma-failure to demonstrate it
in uncomplicated demodectic mange. Comp Immunol
Microbiol Infect Dis 6:9, 1983.
135. Bensignor E, Carlotti DN: Moxidectine in the treatment of generalized demodicosis in dogs: A pilot
study: 8 cases. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 554.
135a. Bensignor E, Carlotti DN: Conduite a tenir face a
une dernodecie chez Ie chien. Point Vet 30:667, 1999.
136. Brockis DC: Otitis externa due to Dernodex canis. Vet
Rec 135:464, 1994.
137. Burkett G, et aI: Immunology of dogs with juvenileonset generalized demodicosis as determined by Iymphoblastogenesis and CD4:CD8 ratios. J Vet All Clin
Immunol 4:46, 1996.
138. Burrows M: Evaluation of the clinical efficacy of moxidectin in the treatment of generalized demodicosis in
the dog. Proc Aust CoIl Vet Sci, 1997.
139. Bussieras J, Chermette R: Amitraz and canine demodicosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:779, 1986.
140. Carlotti DN, et aI: Therapy of generalized demodicosis with variable oral doses of milbemycine oxime
in 88 dogs. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Oxford, 1998, p 583.
141. Caswell JL, et aI: A prospective study on the immunophenotype and temporal changes in the histologic
lesions of canine demodicosis. Vet Pathol 34:279,
1997.
142. Caswell JL, et aI: Canine demodicosis: A reexamination of the histopathologic lesions and description of
the immunophenotype of infiltrating cells. Vet Dermatol 6:9, 1995.
143. Caswell JL, et aI: Establishment of Dernodex canis on
canine skin engrafted onto scid-beige mice. J Parasitol
82:911, 1996.
144. Cayatte SM, et aI: Perifollicular melanosis in the dog.
Vet Dermatol 3:165, 1992.
145. Chen C: A review of canine demodicosis. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet
Dermatol 14:13, 1998.
146. Chen C: A short-tailed demodectic mite and Demodex canis infestation in a Chihuahua dog. Vet Dermatol 6:227, 1995.
147. Chesney CJ: Short form of Dernodex species mite in
the dog: Occurrence and measurements. J Small
Anim Pract 40:58, 1999.
148. Corbett R, et aI: Cellular immune responsiveness in
dogs with demodectic mange. Transplant Proc 7:557,
1975.
149. Corbett RB, et aI: The cell-mediated immune response: Its inhibition and in vitro reversal in dogs
with demodectic mange. Fed Proc 35:589, 1976.

150. Day MJ: An immunohistochemical study of the lesions of demodicosis in the dog. J Comp Path 116:
203, 1997.
151. Dodds J: Bleeding disorders: Their importance in everyday practice. Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 44:147,
1977.
152. Duclos DD, et aI: Prognosis for treatment of adultonset demodicosis in dogs: 34 cases (1979-1990).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:616, 1994.
153. Folz SD: Demodicosis (Demodex canis). Comp Cont
Educ 5:116, 1983.
154. Fondati A: The efficacy of daily oral ivermectin in the
treatment of 10 cases of generalized demodicosis in
adult dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:99, 1996.
155. Franc M, Soubeyroux H: Le traitement de la demodecie du chien par un collier a 9 pourcent amitraz.
Rev Med vet 137:583, 1986.
156. Gaafer SM, Greeve J: Natural transmission of Dernodex canis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 148:1043,
1966.
157. Garfield RA, Reedy LM: The use of oral milbemycin
oxime (Interceptor) in the treatment of chronic generalized demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 3:231, 1992.
158. Cuaguere E: La demodecie du chien adulte. A propos de 22 cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 26:411,
1991.
159. Cuaguere E: Efficacy of daily oral ivermectin treatment in 38 dogs with generalized demodicosis: A
study of relapse rates. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 453.
160. Cuaguere E: La demodecie canine; strategie therapeutique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:295, 1995.
161. Hamann F, et al: Canine demodicosis. Kleintierpraxis
42:745, 1997.
162. Havrileck B, et aI: Suivi immunitaire individuel de
chiens demodeciques par intradermoreactions a la
phytohemagglutinin. Applications au prognostic. Rev
Med Vet 140:599, 1989.
163. Healy MC, Gaafar SM: Demonstration of reaginic
antibody (IgE) in canine demodectic mange: An immunofluorescent study. Vet Parasitol 3:107, 1977.
164. Healy MC, Gaafar SM: Immunodeficiency in canine
demodectic mange. II. Skin reactions to phytohemagglutinin and concanavalin A. Vet Parasitol 3:133,
1977.
165. Hiller A, Desch CE: A new species of Dernodex mite
in the dog: Case report. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 13:118,
1997.
166. Hirsch DC, et aI: Suppression of in vitro lymphocyte
transformation by serum from dogs with generalized
demodicosis. Am J Vet Res 36:195, 1975.
167. Holm B: Clinical efficacy of rnilbemycine oxime in
the treatment of generalized demodicosis in the dog:
A retrospective study of 40 cases (1993-1995). In
Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford,
1998, p 582.
168. Krawiec DR, Gaafar SM: Studies on immunology of
demodicosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:669, 1980.
169. Kwochka KW, et al: The efficacy of amitraz for generalized demodicosis in dogs: A study of two concentrations and frequencies of application. Comp Cont
Educ 2:234, 1980.
170. Kwochka KW: Demodicosis. In: Griffin CE, et aI
(eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 72.

5 I 2 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
171. Lemarie SL: Canine demodicosis. Comp Cont Ed 18:
354,1996.
172. Lemarie SL, et al: A retrospective study of juvenileand adult -onset generalized demodicosis in dogs
(1986:91). Vet Dermatol 7:3, 1996.
173. Lemarie SL, Horohov DW: Evaluation of interleukin2 production and interleukin-2 receptor expression in
dogs with generalized demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 7:
213, 1996.
174. Mason KY: A new species of Demodex mite with D.
canis causing canine demodicosis: A case report. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil
Vet Dermatol 9:92, 1993.
175. Medleau LM, et al: Efficacy of daily amitraz therapy
for generalized demodicosis in dogs: Two independent studies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:246,
1995.
176. Medleau L, et al: Daily ivermectin for treatment of
generalized demodicosis in dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:209,
1996.
177. Miller WH, Jr, et al: Dermatologic disorders of the
Chinese Shar Peis: 58 cases (1981-1989). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 200:986, 1992.
178. Miller WH Jr, et al: Efficacy of milbemycin oxime in
the treatment of generalized demodicosis in adult
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1426, 1993.
179. Miller WH Jr, et al: Clinical efficacy of increased
dosages of milbemycin oxime for treatment of generalized demodicosis in adult dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1581, 1995.
180. Mojzisova S, et al: Studies on the immunology of
canine demodicosis. In: Kwochka, KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 498.
181. Mojzisova J, et al: The immunomodulatory effect of
levamisole with the use of amitraz in dogs with uncomplicated generalized demodicosis. Vet Med
(Praha) 42:307, 1997.
181a. Mozos E, et al: Leishmaniosis and generalized demodicosis in three dogs: A clinicopathological and immunohistochemical study. J Comp Pathol 120:257,
1999.
182. Muller GH: Demodicosis treatment with Mitaban liquid concentrate (amitraz). JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 19:
435, 1983.
183. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: Milbemycin oxime in the
treatment of canine demodicosis. Aust Vet Practit 25:
122, 1995.
183a. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: An unusual presentation
of canine demodicosis caused by a long-bodied Demodex mite in a Lakeland terrier. Aust Vet Practit 29:
128, 1999.
183b. Mueller RS, et al: Daily oral ivermectin for treatment of generalised demodicosis in 23 dogs. Aust Vet
Practit 29:132, 1999.
184. Muse R, Walder EJ: Nodular granulomatous dermatitis and generalized demodicosis in a dog. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 14:75, 1998.
185. Nayak DC, et al: Prevalence of canine demodicosis in
Orissa (India). Vet Parasitol 73:347, 1997.
186. Nayak DC, et al: Therapeutic efficacy of some homeopathic preparations against experimentally produced
demodicosis in canines. Indian Vet J 75:342, 1998.
187. Nutting WB: Hair follicle mites (Acari: Demodicidae)
of man. Int J Dermatol 15:79, 1976.
188. Nutting WB: Hair follicle mites (Demodex spp.) of

medical and veterinary concern. Cornell Vet 66:214,
1976.
189. Nutting WB, Desch CEo Demodex canis: Redescription and reevaluation. Cornell Vet 68:139, 1978.
190. Owen LN: Transplantation of canine osteosarcoma.
Eur J Cancer 5:615, 1969.
191. Paradis M, et al: Efficacy of daily ivermectin treatment in a dog with amitraz-resistant, generalized demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 3:85, 1992.
192. Paradis M, Page N: Topical (pour-on) ivermectin in
the treatment of canine generalized demodicosis. Vet
Dermatol 9:55, 1998.
193. Paulik S, et al: Evaluation of canine lymphocyte blastogenesis prior and after in vitro suppression by dog
demodicosis serum using ethidium bromide fluorescence assay. Vet Med (Praha) 41:7, 1996.
194. Paulik S, et al: Lymphocyte blastogenesis to concanavalin A in dogs with localized demodicosis according
to duration of disease. Vet Med (Praha) 41:245,
1996.
195. Reedy NR, et al: Serum thyroxine levels in canine
demodicosis. Indian J Anim Sci 61:1300, 1991.
196. Ristic Z, et al: Ivermectin for treatment of generalized demodicosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
1308, 1995.
197. Roy S, et al: Therapeutic evaluation of herbal ectoparasiticides against canine demodicosis. Indian Vet J
73:871, 1996.
198. Sako S, Yamane 0: Studies on the canine demodicosis. III. Examination of the oral-internal infection,
intrauterine infection, and infection through respiratory tract. Jpn J Parasitol 1l:499, 1962.
199. Sako S: Studies on the canine demodicosis. IV. Experimental infection of Demodex folliculorum var.
canis to dogs. Trans Tottori Soc Agri Sci 17:45, 1964.
199a. Saridomichelakis M, et al: Adult-onset demodicosis
in two dogs due to Demodex canis and a short-bodied
demodectic mite. J Small Anim Pract 40:529, 1999.
200. Schwassmann M, et al: Use of lufenuron for treatment of generalized demodicosis in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:11, 1997.
201. Scott DW, et al: Studies on the therapeutic and immunologic aspects of generalized demodectic mange
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:233, 1974.
202. Scott DW, et al: Further studies on the therapeutic
and immunologic aspects of generalized demodectic
mange in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:203,
1976.
203. Scott DW, Walton DK: Experiences with the use of
amitraz and ivermectin for the treatments of generalized demodicosis in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:
535, 1985.
203a. Scott DW: Treatment of canine demodicosis: Then
and now. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet DermatoI15:111, 1999.
204. Tapp T, et al: Efficacy of alternate day oral ivermectin in the treatment of generalized demodicosis. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 14:25, 1998.
205. Totman M, et al: Secondary immunodeficiency in
dogs with enteric, dermatologic, infectious, or parasitic diseases. J Vet Med B 45:321, 1998.
206. Wilkie BN, et al: Deficient cutaneous response to
PHA-P in healthy puppies from a kennel with a high
prevalence of demodicosis. Can J Comp Med 43:415,
1979.
207. Wolfe JH, Halliwell REW: Total hemolytic cornple-

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 5 13
ment values in normal and diseased dog populations.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1:287, 1980.

Feline Demodicosis
208. Bailey RG, Thompson RC: Demodectic mange in a
cat. Aust Vet J 57:49, 1981.
209. Beale KM: Contagion and occult demodicosis in a
family of 2 cats. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 14:99, 1998.
210. ~halmers ~, e~ aI: Demodicosis in two cats seropositive for felme Immunodeficiency virus. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 194:256, 1989.
210a. Chesney CJ: An unusual species of demodex mite in
a cat. Vet Rec 123:671, 1988.
211. Conroy JD, et aI: New Demodex sp. infesting a cat: A
case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:405, 1982.
212. Cowman LA, et aI: Generalized demodicosis in a cat
responsive to amitraz. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1442
1988.
'
213. Chesney CJ: Demodicosis in the cat. J SmaIl Anim
Pract 30:689, 1989.
214. Desch C, Nutting WB: Demodex cati, Hirst, 1919: A
redescription. Cornell Vet 69:280, 1989.
215. Desch CE Jr, Stewart TB: Demodex gatoi: new species of hair follicle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from
the domestic cat (Carnivora: Felidae). J Med Entomol 36:167, 1999.
216. Foley RH: Feline demodicosis. Comp Cont Ed 17:
481, 1995.
217. Gabbert N, Feldman BF: A case report-Feline Demodex. Feline Pract 6:32, 1976.
218. Cuaguere E, et aI: Demodex cati infestation in association with feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
in situ: A report of five cases. Vet Dermatol 10:61,
1999.
219. Kontos V, et aI: Two rare disorders in the cat: Demodectic otitis externa and Sarcoptic mange. Feline
Pract 26:18, 1998.
220. McDougal BJ, Novak CPo Feline demodicosis caused
by an unnamed Demodex mite. Comp Cont Educ
(SAC) 8:820, 1986.
221. Medleau L, et aI: Demodicosis in cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 24:85, 1988.
222. Morris DO: Contagious demodicosis in three cats residing in the same household. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:350, 1996.
223. Morris DO, Beale KM: Feline demodicosis-a retrospective of 15 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 13·127
1997.
. ,
224. Nutting WB: Demodex crecti, notes on its biology.
J Parasitol 44:328, 1958.
225. Stogdale L, Moore DJ: Feline demodicosis. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:427, 1982.
226. White SD, et aI: Generalized demodicosis associated
with diabetes mellitus in two cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 191:448, 1987.

Canine Scabies
227. Arlian LG, et aI: Survival of adults and developmental
stages of Sarcoptes scabiei oar. canis when off the
host. Exp Appl Acarol 6:181, 1989.
228. Arlian LG, et aI: Cross infestivity of Sarcoptes scabiei.
J Am Acad Dermatol 10:979, 1984.
229. Arlian LG, et aI: The development of protective
immunity in canine scabies. Vet Parasitol 62:133,
1996.

230. Arlian LG, et aI: Characterization of lymphocyte subtypes in scabietic skin lesions of naive and sensitized
dogs. Vet Parasitol 68:347, 1997.
231. Beck W, Hiepe TH: Untersuchungen zu einem intrakut.antest mi~ einer Sarcoptes-milbenextrakt-Iosung
(Acan: Sarcoptulae) als methode zum nachweis an
Sarcoptes-raude erkrankter hunde. Tierarztl Wschr
111:174, 1998.
232. Bergvall K: Clinical efficacy of milbemycin oxime in
the treatment of canine scabies: A study of 56 cases.
Vet Dermatol 9:231, 1998.
233. Bornstein S: Experimental infection of dogs with Sarcoptes scabiei derived from naturally infected wild red
foxes (Vulpes oulpest: Clinical observations. Vet Dermatol 2:151, 1991.
234. Bornstein S, Zakrisson G: Humoral antibody response
to experimental Sarcoptes scabiei var. oulpes infection
in the dog. Vet Dermatol 4:107, 1993.
235. Bornstein S, et aI: Evaluation of an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the serological diagnosis of canine sarcoptic mange. Vet Dermatol 7:
21, 1996.
236. Carlotti DN, Bensignor E: La gale sarcoptique du
chien: etude retrospective de 38 cas. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 32:117, 1997.
237. Charlesworth EN, Johnson JL: An epidemic of canine
scabies in man. Arch Dermatol 110:574, 1974.
238. Curtis CF: Use of 0.25 per cent fipronil spray to treat
sarcoptic mange in a litter of five-week-old puppies.
Vet Rec 139:43, 1996.
239. Das SS: Effect of a herbal compound for treatment
of sarcoptic mange infestations on dogs. Vet Parasitol
63:303, 1996.
240. Estes SA, et aI: Experimental canine scabies in humans. J Am Acad Dermatol 9:397, 1983.
241. Folz SD: Canine scabies (Sarcoptes scabiei infestation). Comp Cont Educ 6:176, 1984.
242. Folz SD, et aI: Evaluation of a sponge-on therapy for
canine scabies. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 7:29, 1984.
243. Griffin CEo Scabies. In Griffin CE, et aI (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St.
Louis, 1993, P 85.
244. Huang HP, et al: Sarcoptes scabiei infestation in a
cat. Feline Pract 26:10, 1998.
244a. Jagannath MS, Yathiraj S: Clinical evaluation of doramectin in the treatment of ectoparasites of canines.
Indian Vet J 76:333, 1999.
245. Maldonado RR, et aI: Norwegian scabies due to Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis. Arch Dermatol 113·1733
1977.
.
,
246. Miller WH Jr, et aI: Treatment of canine scabies with
milbemycin oxime. Can Vet J 37:219, 1996.
247. Morris DO, Dunstan RW: A histomorphological study
of sarcoptic acariasis in the dog: 19 cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:119, 1996.
248. Paradis M, et aI: Topical (pour-on) ivermectin in the
treatment of canine scabies. Can Vet J 38:379, 1997.
249. Paradis M: Scabies and Cheyletiella. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
DermatoI13:48, 1997.
250. Prelaud P, Cuaguere E: Sensitization to the house
dust mite, Dennatophagoides [arinae, in dogs with
sarcoptic mange. Vet Dermatol 6:205, 1995.
250a. Zahler M, et aI: Molecular analyses suggest monospecificity of the genus Sarcoptes (Acari: Sarcophidae). Int J Parasitol 29:759, 1999.

5 14 • Parasitic Skin Diseases

Feline Scabies
250b. Delucchi L, Castro E: Use of doramectin for treatment of notoedric mange in five cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 216:215, 2000.
251. Ferrero 0, et al: Doramectina en el tratamiento de la
sarna notoedrica del gato. Rev Med Vet (Argent) 77:
106, 1996.
252. Foley RH: A notoedric manage epizootic in an island's cat population. Feline Pract 19:8, 1991.

Spiders
253. Berger RS: The unremarkable brown recluse spider
bite. J Am Med Assoc 225:1109, 1973.
254. King KE: Spider bites. Arch Dennatol 123:41, 1987.
255. Meerdink GL: Bites and stings of venomous animals.
In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VIII.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1983.
256. Muir G: Red back spider bite in a cat. Cont Ther Ser
191:56, 1996
257. Northway RB: A therapeutic approach to venomous
spider bites. Vet Med (SAC) 80:38, 1985.
258. Wong RC, et al: Spider bites (in depth review). Arch
Dermatol 123:98, 1987.

Pediculosis
258a. Bordeau W: Traitement d'un cas de phtiriose 11 Trichodectes canis par Ie fipronyl chez un chat. Point
Vet 30:655, 1999.
259. Cooper PR, Penaliggon J: Use of fipronil to eliminate
recurrent infestation by Tricodectes canis in a pack of
bloodhounds. Vet Rec 139:95, 1996.
260. Frye FL, Furman DP: Phthiriasis in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 1.52:1113, 1968.
261. Majumder P, et al: Control of lice infestation in dog
with Butox (Deltamethrin) in South Tripura. Indian J
Anim Health 33:65, 1994.
261a. Mencke N: Efficacy of Advantage against natural infestations of dogs with lice: a field study from Norway.
Compend Cont Edu Pract Vet 22(Suppl): 18, 2000.
262. Shastri UV: Efficacy of ivermectin against lice infestation in cattle, buffaloes, goats, and dogs. Indian Vet J
68:191, 1991.
263. Shipstone M, et al.: Milbemycin oxime as a treatment
for canine scabies. Aust Vet Practit 27:170, 1997.

Fleas
264. Arther RG, et al: Efficacy of imidacloprid for removal
and control of fleas (Ctenocephalides fe/is) on dogs.
Am J Vet Res 58:848, 1997.
265. Ascher F, et al: Knock-down effect of a 2 per cent
permethrin spray used for flea allergy dermatitis therapy. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 566.
265a. Ascher F, et al: Antifeeding effect of modern insecticides. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Group, Spring
1998, p 20.
266. Atwell R, et al: The use of topical fipronil in field
studies for flea control in domestic dogs. Aust Vet
Practit 27:175, 1997.
267. Baker KP, Elharam S: The biology of Ctenocephalides
canis in Ireland. Vet Parasitol 45:141, 1992.
268. Blagbum BL, et al: Efficacy of lufenuron against developmental stages of fleas (Ctenocephalides felis felis)
in dogs housed in simulated home environments. Am
J Vet Res 56:464, 1995.
268a. Blagburn BL, et al: Dose titration of an injectable
formulation of lufenuron in cats experimentally infested with fleas. Am J Vet Res 60:1513, 1999.

269. Bourdeau P: Indoor control of Ctenocephalides [elis.
Comparison of three products (foggers, fumigation) in
a replicated room. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dennatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 575.
270. Brown CR, et al: The efficacy of ultrasonic pest controllers for fleas and ticks. J S Afr Vet Assoc 62:110,
1991.
271. Carlotti ON, et al: Interet d'une formulation de permethrine en spot-on dans Ie traitement de la dermatite par allergie aux piqftres de puce chez Ie chien:
Une etude prospective de 24 cas. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 32:83, 1997.
272. Carlotti ON, et al: Therapy and prevention of flea
allergy dermatitis with a new permethrin formulation
(foam) in 12 cats. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dennatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 574.
273. Chesney CJ: Species of flea found on cats and dogs in
south west England: Further evidence of their polyxenous state and implications for flea control. Vet Rec
136:356, 1995.
273a. Dean SR, et al: Mode of action of lufenuron in adult
Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med
Entomol 36:486, 1999.
274. Dryden MW, et al: Effects of ultrasonic flea collars
on Ctenocephalides [elis on cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
195:1717, 1989.
275. Dryden MW: Host association, on-host longevity and
egg production of Ctenocephalides felis felis. Vet Parasitol 34:117, 1989.
275a. Dryden MW, Broce AB: Development of a flea trap
for collecting newly emerged Ctenocephalides felis
(Siphonaptera: Pulicidae) in homes. J Med Entomol
30:901, 1993.
275b. Dryden MW, et al: Techniques for estimating onanimal populations of Ctenocephalides fe/is (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med Entomol 31:631, 1994.
275c. Dryden MW: Laboratory evaluations of topical flea
control products. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Group,
Spring 1998, p 14.
275d. Dryden MW, et al: Control of fleas on pets and
in homes by use of imtdacloprid or lufenuron and
a pyrethrin spray. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:36,
1999.
275e. Dryden M: Investigations of alternative flea control
methodologies. Proc Annu Kansas St Univ Conf Vet
61:37, 1999.
2751'. Everett R, et al: Comparative evaluation of the speed
of flea kill of Advantage (imidacloprid) and Revolution (selamectin) on dogs. Compend Cont Edu Pract
Vet 22(Suppl): 9, 2000.
276. Fisher MA, et al: Evaluation of flea control programmes for cats using fenthion and lufenuron. Vet
Rec 138:79, 1996.
277. Foley JE, et al: Seroprevalence of Bartonella henselae
in cattery cats: Association with cattery hygiene and
flea infestation. Vet Quart 20:1, 1998.
278. Franc M, Cadieurques MC: Comparative activity in
dogs of deltamethrin- and diazinon-impregnated collars against Ctenocephalides felis. Am J Vet Res 59:
59, 1998.
279. Franc M, Cadiergues M: Use of injectable lufenuron
for treatment of infestations of Ctenocephalides felis
in cats. Am J Vet Res 58:140, 1997.
280. Franc M, et al: Repartition des especes de puces
rencontrees chez Ie chien en France. Rev Med Vet
149:135, 1998.

Parasitic Skin Diseases • 5 15
281. Franc M, Cadiergues MC: Activity of deltamethrin
shampoo against Ctenocephalides felis and Rhipicephalus sanguineus in dogs. Vet Parasitol 81:341, 1999.
281a. Cuaguere E, et al: Efficacite de l'imidaclopride dans
Ie traitement de la dermatite par allergie aux piqures
de puces chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
34:231, 1999.
282. Guerrini VH, Kriticos CM: Effects of azadirachtin on
Ctenocephalides felis in the dog and cat. Vet Parasitol
74:289, 1998.
283. Harvey RG: Dermatitis in a cat associated with Spilopsyllus cuniculi. Vet Rec 126:89, 1990.
284. Harvey RG, et al: Prospective study comparing flpronil with dichlorvos/fenitrothin and methoprene/pyrethrins in control of flea bite hypersensitivity in cats.
Vet Rec 141:628, 1997.
285. Hastriter MW: Establishment of the tungid flea,
Tunga nwnositus, in the United States. Great Basin
Naturalist 57:281, 1997.
286. Henderson G, et al: The effects of Steinemema carpocapsea (Weiser) application to different life stages
on adult emergence of the cat flea Ctenocephalides
felis (Bouche). Vet Dermatol 6:159, 1995.
287. Herrmann R, et al: Efficacy of a 0.25 per cent fipronil spray in the control of flea allergy dermatitis in
the dog. Kleintierpraxis 43:199, 1998.
288. Hinkle NC, et al: Host grooming efficacy for regulation of cat flea populations. J Med Entomol 35:266,
1998.
288a. Hopkins T: Imidacloprid topical formulation: larvicidal effects against Ctenocephalides felis in the surroundings of treated dogs. Compend Cont Edu Pract
Vet 19:410, 1997.
289. Hopkins T: Imidacloprid and resolution of signs of
flea allergy dermatitis in dogs. Canine Pract 23:18,
1998.
290. Hopkins TJ, et al: Efficacy of imidacloprid to remove
and prevent Ctenocephalides felis infestations on dogs
and cats. Aust Vet Practit 26:150, 1996.
291. Hutchinson MJ, et al: Evaluation of flea control strategies using fipronil on cats in a controlled simulated
home environment. Vet Rec 142:356, 1998.
292. Imai S, et al: Species distribution of flea infested to
dogs and cats in Japan. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 48:775,
1995.
293. Jacobs DE, et al: Comparison of flea control strategies using imidacloprid or lufenuron on cats in a controlled simulated home environment. Am J Vet Res
58:1260, 1997.
294. Jacobs DE, et al: A novel approach to flea control on
cats, using pyriproxyfen. Vet Rec 139:559, 1996.
295. Jacobs DE, et al: Duration of activity of imidacloprid,
a novel adulticide for flea control, against Ctenocephalides felis on cats. Vet Rec 140:259, 1997.
296. Kalkofen UP, Greenberg J: Echidnophaga gallinacea
infestations in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 165:447,
1974.
296a. Kern WH, et al: Outdoor survival and development
of immature cat fleas (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae) in
Florida. J Med Entomol 36:207, 1999.
297. Koutinas A, et al: Flea species from dogs and cats in
northern Greece: Environmental and clinical implications. Vet Parasitol 58:109, 1995.
298. Lebreux B, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy of a diazinon + pyriproxyfen collar in the treatment and control of flea infestation in cats. J Vet Pharm Therap 20:
157, 1997.
299. Le Nain S, et al: Efficacy of a 0.25 per cent fipronil
formulation in the control of flea allergy dermatitis in

the dog. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Oxford, 1998, p 570.
299a. Liebisch A, Reimann U: The efficacy of imidacloprid
against flea infestation on dogs compared with three
other topical preparations. Canine Pract 25:8, 2000.
300. McDonald BJ, et al: An investigation on the influence
of feline flea allergy on the fecundity of the cat flea.
Vet Dennatol 9:75, 1998.
301. Maskiell G: Clinical impressions of s-methoprene-impregnated collars and lufenuron for flea control in
dogs and cats. Aust Vet Practit 25:142, 1995.
301a. Mehlhorn H: Mode of action of imidacloprid and
comparison with other insecticides (i.e., fipronil and
selamectin) during in vivo and in vitro experiments.
Compend Cont Edu Pract Vet 22(Suppl): 4, 2000.
301b. Meola RW, et al: Effect of lufenuron on chorionic
and cuticular structure of unhatched larval Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J Med Entomol 36:92, 1999.
302. Metzger ME, Rust MK: Effect of temperature on cat
flea development and overwintering. J Med Entomol
34:173, 1997.
303. Nishida Y et al: Disinfestation of experimentally infested cat fleas, Ctenocephalides felis, on cats and
dogs by orallufenuron. J Vet Med Sci 57:655, 1995.
303a. Noble SJ, Annstrong PJ: Bee sting envenomation
resulting in secondary immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1026,
1999.
304. Noden BH, et al: Molecular identification of Rickettsia typhi and R. fe/is in co-infected Ctenocephalides
felis. J Med Entomol 35:410, 1998.
305. Pampiglione S, et al: Tunga penetrans (Insecta: Siphonaptera) in pigs in Sao Tome (Equatorial Africa):
Epidemiological, clinical, morphological, and histopathological aspects. Rev Elev Med Vet Pays Trop
51:201, 1998.
306. Postal JM, et al: Field efficacy of a mechanical pump
spray formulation containing 0.25 per cent fipronil in
the treatment and control of flea infestation and associated dermatologic signs in dogs and cats. Vet Dermatol 6:153, 1995.
307. Postal JM, et al: Field efficacy of a 10 per cent
fipronil spot-on formulation in the treatment and control of flea infestation. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 568.
308. Robinson WHo Distribution of cat flea larvae in the
carpeted household environment. Vet Dermatol 6:
145, 1995.
309. Ross DH, et al: Topical pyriproxyfen for control of
the cat flea and management of insecticide resistance.
Feline Pract 26:18, 1998.
310. Rust MK, Dryden MW: The biology, ecology, and
management of the cat flea. Ann Rev Entomol 42:
451, 1997.
311. Silverman J, et aI: Infection of cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis (Bouche) by Neoaplectana carpocapsai
Weiser. J Nematol 14:394, 1982.
312. Smith RD, et al: Impact of an orally administered
insect growth regulator (lufenuron) on flea infestations of dogs in a controlled simulated home environment. Am J Vet Res 57:502, 1996.
313. Studdert VP, et al: Dermatitis of the pinnae of cats in
Australia associated with European rabbit flea. Vet
Rec 123:624, 1988.
314. Sture GH, et al: Dose selection of VK-124-114, a

5 16 • Parasitic Skin Diseases
novel avermectin for efficacy against fleas (Ctenocephalides felis) on dogs and cats. Proc Br Small Anim
Vet Assoc 42:316, 1999.

Mosquito Dermatitis
315. Mason KV, et aI: Mosquito bite-caused eosinophilic
dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:2086,
1991.
316. Nagata M, Ishida T: Cutaneous reactivity to mosquito
bites and its antigens in cats. Vet Dermatol 8:19,
1997.

Fly Dermatitis
317. Penny DS: Fly strike in a dog. Vet Rec 125:79, 1989.
318. Pucheu-Haston CM, et aI: Allergic cross-reactivities in
flea-reactive canine serum samples. Am J Vet Res 57:
1000, 1996.
319. White SD, Bourdeau P: Hypersensibilites aux piqfires
de dipteres chez les carnivores. Point Vet 27:203,
1995.

329. Nivoix R, Chermette R: Use of ivermectin for prevention of cutaneous tumbu fly (Cordylobia anthropophaga) myiasis in dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 471.
330. Roosje PJ, et aI: A case of Dermatobia hominis in a
dog in the Netherlands. Vet Dermatol 3:183, 1992.

Cuterebra Species Infestation
331. Baird CR: Development of Cuterebra rujicrus (Diptera: Cuterebridae) in six species of rabbits and rodents with a morphological comparison of c. rujicrus
and C. jellisoni third instars. J Med Entomol 9:81,
1972.
332. Fitzgerald SD, et aI: A fatal case of intrathoracic
cuterebriasis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:353,
1996.
333. Kazocos KR, et aI: Cuterebra species as a cause of
pharyngeal myiasis in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
16:773, 1980.

Myiasis

Hymenoptera (Bees, Wasps, and Hornets)

320. Bourdeau, P, et al: Myiase 11 Dermatobia hominis.
Rec Med vet 164:901, 1988.
321. Bragagna P, et aI: Furuncular myiasis in a dog: Case
report. Praxis Vet 18:20, 1997.
322. Chermette R: A case of canine otitis due to screwworm, Cochliomyia hominivorax, in France. Vet Rec
124:641, 1989.
323. Dongus H, et aI: Cordylobia anthropophaga als erreger einer Hautrnyiasis bei einem Hund in Deutschland. Tierartztl Prax 24:493, 1996.
324. Fox MT, et aI: Tumbu fly (Cordylobia anthropophaga) myiasis in a quarantined dog in England. Vet
Rec 130:100, 1992.
325. Hendrix CM: Facultative myiasis in dogs and cats.
Comp Cont Educ 13:86, 1991.
326. Hendrix CM, et aI: Furunculoid myiasis in a dog
caused by Cordylobia anthropophaga. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 207:1I87, 1995.
327. Jayagopala R, et aI: Ivermectin in cutaneous myiasis
of dogs. Indian Vet J 70:557, 1993.
328. Mulder JB: The medical marvels of maggots. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 195:1497, 1989.

334. Cowell AK, et al: Severe systemic reactions to Hymenoptera stings in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
198:1014, 1991.

Canine Facial Eosinophilic Folliculitis and Furunculosis
335. Gross TL: Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the
face. In Ihrke PJ, Mason IS, White SD (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon
Press, Oxford, 1993, p 211.
336. Holtz CS: Eosinophilic dermatitis in a Siberian husky
cross. Calif Vet 44:1I, 1990.

Ants
337. Rakich PM, et aI: Clinical and histologic characterization of cutaneous reactions to stings of the imported
fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) in dogs. Vet Pathol 30:
555, 1993.

Caterpillars
338. Chermette R, Chareyre G: A propos des chenilles
processionnaires. Point Vet 26:9:1993.
339. Poisson L, et aI: Quatre cas d'envenimation par les
chenilles processionnaires du pin chez Ie chien. Point
Vet 25:992, 1994.

Chapter

7
Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal
Skin Diseases

T

hese dermatoses are apparently rare in dogs and cats. Additionally, many of those
that have been reported are associative or circumstantial in nature. This chapter is a
brief overview of proven and suspected skin diseases of viral, rickettsial, and protozoal
origin in dogs and cats .

• VIRAL DISEASES
Feline Leukemia Virus Infection
The feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is an oncogenic immunosuppressive retrovirus. 1. 22 Although it can induce skin tumors (lymphoma, fibrosarcoma), FeLV most commonly affects
the skin by its cytosuppressive actions. Clinical signs include chronic or recurrent gingivitis
or pyoderma (folliculitis, abscess, paronychia), poor wound healing, seborrhea, exfoliative
dermatitis, generalized pruritus, and cutaneous horns.'? The viral origin of the cutaneous
horns was proved by positive gp70 immunochemical staining. I 2
A pruritic crusting dermatitis has been described in six FeLV-positive cats.'? The
lesions are scaly, erosive, and crusted, and vary in distribution. All cases have some
involvement of the face (Fig. 7 -lA) or head, either around the lips or perioral skin,
pinnae, or preauricular skin. Other commonly involved sites include the feet or footpads,
mucocutaneous junctions of the anus or prepuce, legs, or trunk (see Fig. 7 -lB). At
presentation, the cats usually are otherwise healthy.
The differential diagnosis depends on the distribution and the extent of the lesions
and the owner's ability to assess whether the skin lesions preceded the pruritus. If
pruritus is apparently primary, allergic disorders, feline scabies, Cheyletiella, and demodicosis should be considered. With crusting first, drug reaction, superficial pemphigus,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and exfoliative dermatitis of thymoma must be considered.
All cats are FeLV positive on serology,'? but skin biopsies are necessary to prove that
the skin lesions are viral in origin. Histologically, the epidermis is irregularly hyperplastic
and usually heavily crusted (Fig. 7-2). A characteristic feature is syncytial-type giant cell
formation in the epidermis and outer root sheath of the hair follicles to the level of the
isthmus (Fig. 7-3). Keratinocytes within and around the giant cells often are apoptotic.
Involved skin shows positive gp70 staining while nonlesional skin from these cats or other
FeLV-positive cats with no skin disease is negative.
The skin lesions respond poorly to treatment with antibiotics, glucocorticoids, or other
agents. With time, the cats often show signs of internal disease, e.g., anorexia, lethargy,
but none is found at necropsy.

Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is another retrovirus that causes a variety of cytosuppressive disorders in the cat. 1, 48, 49 The most common clinical sign is chronic or recurrent
oral disease (gingivitis, periodontal disease, stomatitisj.P: 42 Reported dermatologic signs
include chronic or recurrent abscesses, chronic bacterial infections of the skin and ears, an
517

518 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-1. Legend continued on opposite page

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 5 I 9

FIGURE 7-2. FeLV dermatitis. Marked epidermal hyperplasia with surface scale/crust.

increased frequency of infection with Cryptococcus neofonnans, Candida albicans, or
Microsporum canis, and demodicosis.!! 30, 48
The authors have recognized a generalized skin disorder in three FIV-positive cats
which might have a direct association with the virus. All three cats had a generalized
papulocrustous eruption with alopecia and scaling, which was most severe in the head and
limbs (Figs. 7-4 and 7-5). None of the cats was pruritic. On skin biopsy, a hydropic
interface dermatitis was present. Occasional giant keratinocytes were seen. In addition, a
peculiar pallor of the basal epidermal cells was seen (Fig. 7-6). The cause and significance of this finding remains to be seen. No treatments benefited the cats.
The clinical signs of FIV and FeLV overlap; therefore, the two conditions cannot be
differentiated on the basis of signs alone. Co-infection with both viruses can occur, with
marked synergism of Immunosuppression.w Diagnosis of FIV infection is supported by
serologic testing.

FIGURE 7-1. A, Facial exfoliation and mucocutaneous ulceration in a cat with FeLV dermatitis. B, Generalized alopecia
and exfoliation in a cat with FeLV dermatitis. C, Footpad ulceration in feline poxvirus infection. (Courtesy R. Gaskell.) D,
Focal oozing and crust in the temporal area of a cat with feline poxvirus infection. (Courtesy R. Gaskell.) E, Ballooning
degeneration and eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies in feline poxvirus infection. F, Impetigo in a puppy with
distemper. Note the absence of inflammation around the pustules. G, Facial crusting, blepharitis, and corneal ulceration in
a cat with herpes dermatitis. H, Cat from G with crusts removed to show severe ulcerative dermatitis.

520 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-3. FeLV dermatitis.
Syncytial-type giant cells in the epidermis.

Feline Cowpox Virus Infection
Cowpox virus is a member of the Orthopoxvirus genus that has sporadically caused
infections of domestic and exotic cats in various European countries." Cats with an
uncharacterized poxvirus infection have been recognized in India and the United States,
so the geographic area of involvement may be increasing. 1 In one study of 104 healthy
cats, 13.5% were serologically positive for poxvirus antigen, suggesting a higher frequency
of disease than recognized." The natural reservoir is small wild mammals. The
virus circulates in different rodent species, especially voles and wood mice in western
Europe.v 11a Cats typically become infected through wounding while hunting these wild
mammals. Cat-to-cat, cat-to-human, or cat-to-dog transmission can also occur. G• 45
There appears to be no age, breed, or sex predisposition to infection, and many cases
are recognized in the fall of the year." The primary lesion in the disease is an infected

"See references I, 5, 8, 19a, 27, 34, 35, 43-45.

FIGURE

7-4. FIV dermatitis.
Miliary dermatitis-like lesions on the
head.

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 521

FIGURE 7-5. FIV dermatitis.
Partial alopecia with scaling. Papularto-plaquelike lesions were also
present but are not visible.

bite wound, typically on the head, neck, or forelimb. Local viral replication worsens the
primary lesions and is the point source for the subsequent viremia. During the viremic
phase, some cats develop mild pyrexia, inappetence, and depression. Ten to 14 days after
the primary lesion, multiple secondary lesions develop over the body. The secondary or
pox lesions are initially macular but progress to ulcerated, papular to nodular lesions that
crust rapidly (see Fig. 7 -Ie and D). Pruritus is variable, and approximately 20% of
infected cats develop oral vesiculation or ulceration. I. 5 Lesions heal slowly over 3 to 4
weeks and may be permanently scarred. During the development and course of the
secondary lesions, systemic signs of illness are uncommon unless the cat has some intercurrent immunosuppressive disease. One cat died of necrotizing pneumonia.s>
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial and fungal infections, eosinophilic granuloma, and neoplasia (especially mast cell tumor and lymphoma). Definitive diagnosis is
made by skin biopsy, serologic testing, and virus isolation." Dermatohistopathologic findings include hyperplasia, ballooning degeneration, reticular degeneration, microvesicle formation, and necrosis of the affected epidermis and the outer root sheath of the hair
follicle (see Fig. 7 -IE). Eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies are found within
keratinocytes of the epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands.

FIGURE 7-6. Unusual pallor of
the basal epidermal cells (arrows) in
a cat with FlY dermatitis.

522 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
The diagnosis of cowpox is based on the results of diagnostic tests. Serum samples
and fresh biopsy or scab material in viral transport medium are submitted to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory for serologic examination and viral isolation, respectively. Serologic tests cannot differentiate cowpox from other orthopox viruses. Histopathologic examination of secondary lesions usually supports the diagnosis, and orthopoxvirus involvement
can be demonstrated by immunohistochemical techniques'' or electron microscopy. Virus
isolation is the only method of making a precise diagnosis.
There is no specific therapy for cowpox infection. If secondary bacterial infections of
the skin or other organs occur, appropriate antibacterial therapy should be instituted.
Severely ill animals, which typically have an underlying immunosuppressive disorder,
require intense supportive care and may have to be euthanized. Glucocorticoids are
contraindicated.
Feline cowpox has zoonotic potential for contact cats, dogs, and humans.v- !4, !9a. 44, 45, 45a
In humans, these contact infections are uncommon; they can be serious, however, especially if the individual is immunologically compromised. Lesions are typically nodular and
occur most commonly on the hands and arms. A fatality in a human receiving corticosteroids has been documented.r' Accordingly, all infected cats should be isolated and handled carefully. The cowpox virus can remain viable under dry temperature conditions for
several years, but it is susceptible to various disinfectants, especially to hypochlorite
solutions." Dogs develop solitary, asymptomatic, self-healing ulcerated nodules.v- 45
No data are available to indicate whether infection confers long-lasting immunity. To
prevent possible reinfection, hunting should be prohibited.

Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis is a systemic viral disease caused by strains of coronaviruses.
Effusive and noneffusive forms are most common.' Skin lesions other than those associated with debility have not been reported. Several cats that have been experimentally
infected have developed ulcerative lesions around the head and neck (Fig. 7-7).2 Histopathologic tests showed changes typical of a superficial vasculitis, and viral antigen was
demonstrated in blood vessel walls by immunohistochemical techniques.

Canine Distemper
Canine distemper is caused by a paramyxovirus.! In addition to severe respiratory, gastrointestinal, and neurologic disorders, the virus may produce skin lesions in some animals.

FIGURE 7-7. Well-demarcated
necrosis and ulceration over the dorsal neck of a cat with feline infectious peritonitis.

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 523

FIGURE 7-8. Nasal hyperkeratosis in a dog with canine distemper.

Because of their general debility, some dogs, and especially very young puppies, develop
widespread impetigo (see Fig. 7 -IF). The classic skin manifestation of distemper is the
so-called hard pad disease, in which the dog develops nasal (Fig. 7-8) and footpad (Fig.
7 -9) hyperkeratosis of varying severity. Although a variety of diseases (e.g., pemphigus
foliaceus, lupus erythematosus, drug eruption) induce nasodigital hyperkeratosis, animals
with those disorders are often not as systemically ill as dogs with distemper and have
more widespread skin lesions. Distemper, leishmaniasis, necrolytic migratory erythema
(see Chap. 10), and generic dog food skin disease (see Chap. 17) all can produce the
nasodigital lesions and similar systemic signs of illness. The index of suspicion for distemper should be high when the pads are much harder to the touch than the degree of
hyperkeratosis would suggest and the dog's vaccination history is poor.
Histologically, the skin or pad surface is covered with marked orthokeratotic and
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, and acidophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies are commonly
seen in keratinocytes." The inclusion bodies are variable in size and are round to irregular
in outline. Nuclear inclusions are rare. Occasional multinucleated syncytial giant cells can

FIGURE 7-9. Digital hyperkeratosis in a dog with canine distemper.

524 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
be seen in the epidermis. Immunohistochemical detection of canine distemper virus in
haired skin and footpad epithelium was reported to be very reliable for the antemortem
diagnosis of distemper.!"

Contagious Viral Pustular Dermatitis
Contagious viral pustular dermatitis (orf, contagious ecthyma) is a disease that is found
primarily in sheep and goats and is caused by a parapoxvtrus.f Contagious viral pustular
dermatitis was reported in a pack of hounds allowed to feed on sheep carcasses.t" Lesions
consisted of circular areas of acute moist dermatitis, ulceration, and crusts, typically
around the head. Skin biopsy revealed epidermal hyperplasia, ballooning degeneration,
acantholysis within the stratum spinosum, and marked infiltration of neutrophils. Saline
suspensions of skin biopsies were applied to the scarified skin of a normal sheep. Crusts
removed from the inoculation sites were processed for electron microscopy, and parapoxvirus virus particles were readily seen. One cat with parapoxvirus infection has been
documented.F The cat had multiple large crusted lesions over the face and back. Further
details were not provided.
Therapy for contagious viral pustular dermatitis is topical and varies according to the
symptoms involved. The usual course of the disease in animals is 1 to 4 weeks. The
disease may be transmitted to humans if broken skin is exposed to lesion material or
contaminated objects. Generally, contagious viral pustular dermatitis is a benign disease in
humans and results in the formation of a solitary lesion, especially on the hands. Lesions
in humans are characterized by maculae that progress through a papular, nodular, and
papillomatous stage. The lesions are usually centrally umbilicated and occasionally are
bullous. Complications of contagious viral pustular dermatitis in humans include regional
lymphadenopathy, lymphangitis, secondary bacterial infection, and rarely, generalized or
systemic disease.

Pseudorabies
Pseudorabies is an acute, fatal viral disease caused by an a-herpesvirus. 1 Pigs are the main
reservoir of infection. Dogs and cats can be infected by contact with an infected animal
or, more typically, by eating raw pork products or offal. Incubation periods range from 2
to 10 days,20a,23 and death typically occurs within 48 hours of the onset of clinical signs.32
Early work suggested that intense, maniacal upper body pruritus was the cardinal
feature of the disease in dogs. 23 More recent work, however, showed that this sign
occurred in only 52% of affected dogs.32 Ptyalism was a universal finding, followed by
restlessness, anorexia, ataxia, and a variety of other neurologic abnormalities. When
present, the pruritus is intense and leads to self-mutilation, typically of the head and ears.
In cats, the neurologic signs seem to predominate and pruritus is rare. 1, 20a
The diagnosis can be confirmed by virus isolation. Treatment is usually not attempted;
when it is, the result is unrewarding. Prevention by means of strict hygienic procedures is
of paramount importance.

Mumps
Mumps is a human viral disease caused by a paramyxovirus, and there are reports of
clinical disease in dogs from households where humans had mumps.' One author (WHM)
examined a dog with parotid salivary gland enlargement, a probably vesicular cheilitis, and
positive antibody titer to the mumps antigen. Only epidermal collarettes were present on
the lips, so biopsies were not performed. The skin lesions resolved spontaneously as the
salivary gland returned to normal.

Feline Rhinotracheitis Infection
Feline rhinotracheitis is an infection with an a-herpesvirus resulting in upper respiratory
disease." Occasionally, a cat develops oral and cutaneous ulcers. 1, 16. 38 The cutaneous

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 525

ulcers are usually superficial and multiple, and can occur anywhere on the body, including
the footpads. Stress or trauma to the skin might precipitate the development of the ulcers.
Skin biopsies reveal epidermal ulceration with subjacent dermal necrosis and a mixed
inflammatory infiltrate. Basophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies may be visualized in the
keratinocytes or dermal histiocytes. Herpesvirus can be cultured from the skin; more
diagnostically, it can be seen in the keratinocytes via electron microsoopy.P
An ulcerative and necrotizing facial dermatitis or stomatitis has been associated with
herpesvirus 1 infection in cats.s'- 42c, 47 Affected cats mayor may not have active or historical
ocular or respiratory signs. The disorder is recognized most often in adult cats but kittens
can be affected. Typically, crusted skin lesions involve the nasal planum, bridge of the
nose, and periocular skin (see Fig. 7 -IG). When the crusts are removed, the exposed skin is
inflamed and ulcerated (see Fig. 7-1H). Similar lesions can be found elsewhere on the body.
Exfoliative erythema multiforme has occurred in cats following upper respiratory
infections. Generalized exfoliation and erosions occur that histologically showed individual
cell apoptosis and lymphocytic epitheliotropism. The lesions spontaneously resolve after
the infection is cleared."
With intercurrent respiratory signs, the diagnosis is straightforward. In the absence of
respiratory signs, the differential diagnosis would include the FeLV dermatitis, drug
reaction, erythema multiforme, pemphigus vulgaris, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Diagnosis is via skin biopsy. Serologic test results do not confirm active infection nor that
the skin disease is due to the virus. In skin biopsies, an ulcerative, often necrotic,
dermatitis and suppurative folliculitis and furunculosis is seen (Fig. 7-10). Demodex cati
mites may be visible within the follicular lumen.f" There is a perivascular-to-interstitial
mixed inflammatory cell dermatitis with many eosinophils. In the surface and follicular
epithelium, multinucleated keratinocytic giant cells can be seen (Fig. 7-11) and amphophilic intranuclear (Cowdry type A) inclusion bodies can be seen in the giant cells (Fig.
7-12) and other keratinocytes. A unique feature of this disease is necrosis of epitrichial
sweat glands (Fig. 7-13). Ultrastructural studies demonstrate intranuclear virions consistent with herpesvirus. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing in affected cats was
strongly positive for herpesvirus 1,21. 42c However, the use of PCR as a diagnostic test for
feline herpesvirus-associated disease is of limited value because of the occurrence of
healthy carriers." An immunohistochemical test was reported to be accurate.f"
In adult cats, the disorder can be triggered by stress or corticosteroid usage. Correction of these problems with the use of antibiotics and other symptomatic treatments may
allow for spontaneous healing. Other agents suggested include lysine (250 mg of the
formulation without propylene glycol orally q24h), a-interferon, and acyclovir.38 • 47 These
treatments mayor may not be beneficial.

Feline Calicivirus Infection
Oral ulceration is reported to be more common with calicivirus infection than with
rhinotracheitis.' Sporadic reports associate infection with skin lesions of the feet or perineum.P: 25 The tissues are swollen, tender, and ulcerated. Although calicivirus was isolated
from the skin in one case, no histopathologic tests were performed to demonstrate
whether the virus was causal or a contaminant. Because some infected cats can develop a
presumed immune-mediated arthropathy." it is reasonable to assume that the virus can
induce primary skin lesions.

Canine Papillomavirus Infection
Papillomaviruses belong to the papovavirus family and are either known to cause or
suspected to cause oral papillomatosis, cutaneous papillomas, and cutaneous inverted
papillomas in dogs (see Chap. 20).34b At least two strains of virus and probably more exist
in the dog. 24a In classic oral papillomavirus infection, self-cure is the rule, provided that
the host is immunocompetent.w Two additional syndromes have been recognized that are
probably associated with papillomavirus infection in dogs.
The first syndrome involves the development of multiple warts on the footpads of

526 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-10. Suppurative, necrotizing folliculitis and furunculosis in a cat with herpes dermatitis.

young dogs." Affected dogs are 1 to 2 years of age at the onset of symptoms. They
develop discrete, firm, hyperkeratotic, often hornlike lesions on multiple pads of two or
more paws (Fig. 7 -14A). In the dogs studied, lesions were not detected elsewhere. If the
lesions are large or involve the weight-bearing surface of the pad, lameness can occur.
The lesions wax and wane in severity, and individual lesions may spontaneously resolve
but new ones develop. Histologically, the lesions have the characteristics of viral papillomas; to date, however, efforts to demonstrate the virus have been unrewarding. Treatment
with topical keratolytic or softening (e.g., water and petrolatum) agents removes the
hyperkeratotic debris, softens the lesions, and decreases the dog's discomfort, but it does
not appear to alter the course of infection. Topical dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and oral
etretinate have been of no benefit in the few dogs treated. Spontaneous resolution of all
lesions has not been recognized and it is unknown whether immunotherapy would be of
benefit."
The second syndrome involves the development of multiple discrete and pigmented
papules, plaques, or nodules (Fig. 7-15). The cases recognized have occurred in young
adult dogs (3 to 5 years) with no prior history of skin disease.v 17, 24a, 33 In one dog, lesions
developed while the dog was receiving a corticosteroid and spontaneously regressed within
3 weeks of drug withdrawal." Lesions can be singular but typically are multiple from the
onset, involved any skin surface, and became more numerous with time. Histologically,
the lesions are sharply demarcated and characterized by surface and infundibular follicular

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 527

FIGURE 7-11. Epidermal giant cells in a cat
with herpes dermatitis.

epithelial pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia and dysplasia. No koilocytosis or inclusion
bodies were seen. A novel papillomavirus was demonstrated in one dog37 and probably is
responsible for the lesions in the other dogs. The lesions can persist unchanged for over
18 months, but transformation to intraepidermal carcinomas may occur.l": 33 No effective
treatment is reported.
Feline Papillomavirus Infection
Although papillomas are occasionally recognized in cats, there was no evidence for their
viral induction in cats until 1990. 1O, 42b Two aged Persian cats were described with multiple
hyperkeratotic plaques (see Fig. 7 -14B).9 The lesions were of variable size, predominately
truncal in location, and hyperpigmented in one case. Histopathologic studies showed
surface and follicular infundibular epithelial hyperplasia and dysplasia with koilocytosis.
Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies were seen and papillomavirus-like particles were demonstrated on electron microscopy. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated papillomavirus antigen that had characteristics of a novel feline papillomavirus. Other cases with
similar features were subsequently reported. 12. 15 The cats were assumed to be immunocompromised.
Many cases of multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ have been recognized in
the cat since 19904 . 18, 24, 31 (see Chap. 20). The lesions from these cats also showed
surface and follicular hyperplasia and dysplasia, but there was far more cellular atypia and

528 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-12. Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies (arrow) in herpes dermatitis.

koilocytosis was absent. Immunohistochemical staining of 63 cases with rabbit antibovine
papillomavirus antisera demonstrated positive nuclear staining of cells within the stratum
granulosum in 30. 24 Ultrastructural studies in six cats showed intranuclear particles that
were compatible with papillomavirus, These data would suggest that the feline papillomavirus induces long-lasting dysplastic lesions that eventually become neoplastic.
Therapeutic options are limited. Surgical removal is usually impractical because of the
numbers of lesions, their location, or both, and because new lesions appear after surgery.
Topical treatment with 5-fluorouracil, which can be effective in humans and dogs,31 is
contraindicated in cats because of its neurotoxicity. Preliminary work suggests that Bradiation therapy (strontium-Btl plesiotherapy) is an effective treatment for early Iesions'",
as with surgery, however, it does not prevent new lesions. Anecdotal reports suggest that
treatment with interferon alfa may be effective (see Chap. 20).

Neoplasia
Papovaviruses cause cutaneous and mucosal papillomas (warts) in the dog (see Chap. 20).
Feline sarcoma virus produces cutaneous fibrosarcomas in young cats (see Chap. 20).
FeLV and feline sarcoma virus have been associated with the development of lymphosarcoma, liposarcoma, melanoma, hemangioma, and multiple cutaneous horns in cats (see
Chap. 20).

• RICKETTSIAL DISEASES
Canine Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by the rickettsial agent Rickettsia rickettsii and is
transmitted by ticks. I. 52. 55, 56 It is a seasonal disease in the United States, with cases

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 529

FIGURE 7-13. Epitrichial sweat gland necrosis
in herpes dermatitis.

occurring between April and September. Infected dogs develop fever, anorexia, lethargy,
peripheral lymphadenopathy, and signs of neurologic dysfunction. Approximately 20% of
cases will develop skin lesions of erythema, petechiation, edema, and occasionally, necrosis
and ulceration of the oral (see Fig. 7 -14C), ocular, and genital mucous membranes and
the skin of the nose, pinnae, ventrum, scrotum (see Fig. 7 -14D), and distal limbs and
feet. 51. 56 Edema of the extremities is frequently seen and is the earliest cutaneous sign.
The epididymis of male dogs may be painful and swollen. Hematologic changes may
include anemia, leukopenia, or leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia. Skin biopsy reveals
necrotizing vasculitis (Fig. 7-16).
Dogs with Rocky Mountain spotted fever have a fourfold rise in serum antibody titer
to R. rickettsii. Direct immunofluorescence testing for R. rickettsii antigen in formalinfixed skin biopsy specimens is often positive (antigen seen within vascular endothelium)'!
Therapy includes tetracycline (22 mglkg q8h orally), doxycycline (10 to 20 mglkg q12h
orally), or chloramphenicol (20 mglkg q8h orally) for 1 to 2 weeks and supportive care. 1. 59
Intercurrent use of high-dose corticosteroids to treat the skin lesions can prolong the
rickettsemia and course of treatment but otherwise has no detrimental effects/" The dog
presents a potential public health danger when infested with R. rickettsii-infected ticks;
there is also a danger when blood or tissues from rickettsemic dogs are handled without
suitable protection.

Canine Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichiosis is caused by the tickbome rickettsial agent Ehrlichia canis. 1 Systemic signs of
illness predominate and include fever, weight loss, depression, lethargy, and anorexia.
Hematologic and clotting abnormalities, vasculitis, and monoarthropathy or polyarthropathy also can be seen. Skin lesions are very rare and include a crusting facial dermatitis
involving the bridge of the nose.P' pustular and purpuric lesions due to vasculitis, and an

530 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-14. Legend continued on opposite page

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 53 I

FIGURE 7-15. Multiple pigmented plaques due to papillomavirus infection in a Shar pei.

intensely pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis." With its immunosuppressive nature, some
German shepherd dogs develop recurrent German shepherd pyoderma until the ehrlichiosis is resolved (see Chap. 4). The facial dermatitis had histologic features seen in
lupus erythematosus, but the dog was antinuclear antibody (ANA) negative and positive
for Ehrlichia canis. Doxycycline, an antibiotic with very little direct effect on the skin,
resulted in resolution of the skin lesions This highlights the need to consider infectious
agents when the skin lesions clinically and histologically resemble those seen in lupus.

Feline Haemobartonellosis
Feline haemobartonellosis (feline infectious anemia) is an acute or chronic disease of
domestic cats characterized by fever, depression, anorexia, and macrocytic hemolytic anemia.' It is caused by the rickettsial agent Haemobartonella felis. Cutaneous hyperesthesia
and alopecia areata have been reported to occur in cats with acute and chronic haemobartonellosis'P, however, no pictures, photomicrographs, or details of any kind were provided
to substantiate these cutaneous diagnoses .

• PROTOZOAL DISEASES
Feline Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasmosis is a multisystemic disease caused by the coccidian Toxoplasma gondiP' 99
Toxoplasmosis has been rarely reported to cause various cutaneous lesions in humans'"
and in cats.v 78 Histopathologic findings in cats were reported to be necrotizing dermatitis
and vasculitis with Toxoplasma (Fig. 7-17). PCR-based techniques are available for the
rapid and accurate diagnosis of toxoplasmosis.P"

FIGURE 7-14. A, Discrete wartlike lesion on the edge of the pad of a puppy. B, A focal hyperpigmented and crusted
lesion associated with papiIIomavirus infection in a cat. Note that the pigmentary change extends beyond the crusting. C,
Oral ulceration in a dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (Courtesy C. Foil.) D, Multifocal ulceration of the scrotum in
a dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. E, Edema, purpura, and scaling on the scrotum of a dog with babesiosis.
(Courtesy D. Carlotti.) F, Exfoliative dermatitis on the head and pinnae of a dog with leishmaniasis. (Courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
G, Mucocutaneous ulceration in a dog with visceral leishmaniasis. (Courtesy A. Koutinas.) H, Purpura, ulceration, and
crusting on the paw of a dog with leishmaniasis. (Courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)

532 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

FIGURE 7-16. Leukocytoclastic
vasculitis in a dog with Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

Canine Caryosporosis
Coccidia of the genus Caryospora have a complicated life cycle involving rodents, reptiles,
and raptors.'- 76 Infection occurs by ingestion of an infected host and results primarily in
diarrhea. These organisms have been suspected'<- 123 or identifled?" in puppies that
developed pustules, plaques, or nodules on the skin of the trunk. The tissue reaction was
pyogranulomatous with eosinophils, and numerous organisms in various stages were identified in macrophages and connective tissue cells (Fig. 7-18).

Canine Neosporosis
Neosporosis is caused by Neospora caninum.s- 58, 75, 80, 99.,108,120 Because its tachyzoites and
tissue cysts resemble those of Toxoplasma gondii, the organism has doubtless existed
unrecognized for years. Its complete life cycle is unknown. Infection occurs via vertical
transmission or postnatal inoculation, the latter being most important, 58, 117 Exposure to
cats may increase the risk of infection.'!" In one study, about 15% of normal dogs were

FIGURE 7-17. Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites (arrow) in endothelial
cells of a cat with cutaneous toxoplasmosis.

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 533

FIGURE 7- 18. Tachyzoites (arrow) of Caryospora in pyogranulomatous dermatitis of a dog. (Courtesy
J. Dubey.)

serologically positive. Sporozoites penetrate cells and change into tachyzoites, which divide
rapidly and cause tissue damage. Tachyzoites then become bradyzoites within tissue cysts.
Dogs of any age can be infected, but clinical signs are more severe in young dogs.
Neurologic and muscular signs predominate, but pneumonia, hepatitis, myocarditis, or
dermatitis can also be seen. 89. 120 Skin disease has been described in a small number of
dogs. Most had widespread draining nodules.?" 87. 99a, 112, 113. 115 but one had a rapidly
spreading, ulcerative dermatitis of the eyelids, neck, thorax, and perineurrr" The lesions
may be pruritic.
Histologically, nodular lesions are characterized by a pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Tachyzoites can be seen within keratinocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and rarely, in
endothelial cells. The dog with ulcerative lesions had an eosinophilic necrotizing dermatitis
with severe congestion, thrombosis, and infarction." To differentiate neosporosis from
toxoplasmosis, immunohistochemical or ultrastructural studies are needed. Serologic tests
are available to determine the rate of infection.U? A titer of ~1:800 by indirect fluorescent antibody testing is considered strongly suggestive of active infection.P"
Susceptibility testing of N. caninum to various antimicrobial agents has been performed but detailed studies on the in vitro versus in vivo correlation of these data are not
available." Susceptibility testing suggests that sulfamethoxazole, azithromycin, canthromycin, erythromycin, doxycycline, minocycline, and clindamycin hydrochloride can be of
benefit. Several cases were treated with a 21-d ay115 or 45-day79 course of clindamycin
(12.5 to 18.5 mglkg, orally, ql2h) with resolution of the lesions.79.99a Combination therapy
with pyrimethamine (0.25 to 0.5 mglkg, orally, ql2h) and sulfadiazine (30 mglkg, orally,
ql2h) is also reported to be effective. 99a When this combination is used, folinic acid (5
mg/day) or brewer's yeast (100 mg/kg/day) is given to prevent bone marrow suppression.P'"

Canine Sarcocystosis
Sarcocystis organisms are widespread in nature, especially in cattle and sheep.' Dogs and
cats become infected by ingesting tissue cysts (sarcocysts). Sarcocystis species are typically
not pathogenic for dogs and cats, although there has been one report of a dog with
chronic diarrhea who developed multiple cutaneous abscesses over the whole body and
especially on the hind limbs."? Biopsy showed severe necrotizing, fibrinosuppurative dermatitis with numerous neutrophils and fewer eosinophils and macrophages. Vessels were

534 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases

congested and plugged, and numerous protozoal organisms were seen within macrophages
and, occasionally, in endothelial cells of vessels.

Canine Babesiosis
Canine babesiosis is a tickborne hematozoan disease caused by three species of Babesial. 101: Babesia canis, which is worldwide in its distribution, and Babesia gibsoni and
Babesia vogeli, which are more restricted. Infection induces a parasitemia that results in
varying clinical signs. Asymptomatic carriers exist.
Aside from the oral or cutaneous petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages associated
with thrombocytopenia or disseminated intravascular coagulation, skin lesions are rare.
Skin lesions are due to subjacent leukocytoclastic vasculitis with or without vascular
necrosis." Clinical signs include edema, ecchymosis, ulceration, and necrosis (see Fig. 714E), which can be seen on the pinnae, axillae, groin, limbs, or scrotum.F" 69 As in
ehrlichiosis, dogs with babesiosis can have some of the clinical features of systemic lupus
erythematosus and may have a positive ANA titer. Accordingly, all dogs with suspect lupus
erythematosus should have serologic tests for appropriate rickettsial or protozoal diseases
before the diagnosis of systemic lupus is made.
Treatment with pentamidine isothionate resolved the skin lesions in the reported
case/" Other babesiacides may also be effective.

Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is a serious protozoal infection caused by a variety of Leishmania
spp.! 82, 94, 122 Disease is most common in humans and dogs but can be seen in cats and
other domestic animals. The disease is worldwide in distribution. In the Old World, most
cases in dogs occur in the Mediterranean basin and Portugal, but reports have originated
in France, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and other countries. In the New
World, the disease is endemic in South and Central America; endemic foci have been
reported in Texas, Oklahoma, Ohio, Michigan, and Alabama." Dogs imported from endemic areas may develop the disease months or years later, so cases could be recognized
anywhere. The disease is transmitted to humans and animals by bloodsucking sandflies of
the genus Lutzomyia in the New World and Phlebotomus in the Old World. The frequency of infection increases during warm months when the vector load is high. 57 Domestic and wild dogs, rodents, and other wild mammals are the reservoir. Twenty percent of
seropositive asymptomatic dogs have Leishmania organisms in clinically normal skin.84a
Because of the occurrence of open lesions, some investigators have expressed concern
regarding the possibility of direct or mechanical transmission from dog to dog or from dog
to humans. Leishmaniasis in HIV-positive humans is an emerging disease.P'" The possibility that humans act as a reservoir for other humans and animals has been put forth."
In general, tissue damage in leishmaniasis is due to granulomatous inflammation and
immune complex deposition. It has been hypothesized that dogs with subclinical or latent
leishmaniasis may develop cutaneous lesions at the sites of external trauma and resultant
inflammatory processes, because amastigotes in blood cells are transported to the inflamed
areas. 1l 5a This mechanism could partly explain the distribution of inflammatory and ulcerative lesions at pressure points, which is common in canine leishmaniasis.
The incubation period varies from weeks to several years with a gradual onset of signs
and continual progression. The disease primarily affects dogs less than 5 years old. Rural
animals, especially those who spend the night outdoors, are at an increased risk 133 From
10 to more than 50% of seropositive dogs have no clinical signs of disease and may
remain healthy for prolonged periods of time, if not perrnanently.sv- 94a. 123a Skin lesions
occur in over 80% of dogs with visceral involvement. 1, 72, 73, 94. 110, 116 The most common
finding is an exfoliative dermatitis with silvery white, asbestos-like scaling. The exfoliation
can be generalized but usually is most pronounced on the head, pinnae, and extremities
(see Fig. 7 -14F). Nasodigital hyperkeratosis may accompany the scaling, and the involved
skin can be hypotrichotic to alopecic. Periocular alopecia (lunettes) is common. The next

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 535

most common presentation is an ulcerative dermatitis (see Fig. 7 -14G and H). Other
findings include onychogryposis (Fig. 7-19), paronychia, sterile pustular dermatitis, nasal
depigmentation with erosion and ulceration, and nodular dermatitis.s" 94a Secondary bacterial pyoderma occurs in about 25% of the dogs. 94a
Systemic signs of illness are many and varied. Over 50% of involved dogs show
decreased endurance, weight loss, and somnolence. I, 71, 72, 94, 94a Because of the parasitemia
and the host's immunologic response to the organism, physical abnormalities are varied,
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are common findings. Other abnormalities include muscle wasting, cachexia, intermittent fever, keratoconjunctivitis, and
lameness. Because of the Leishmania-induced cell-mediated immunodeficiency, these dogs
can be predisposed to generalized demodicosis in all of its forms. I06a
Cats are resistant to experimental infection, and reports of spontaneous cases are
rare,59, 93, 96, III The majority of cases had a nodular or crusting dermatitis of the lips, nose,
eyelids, and pinnae. A generalized exfoliative dermatitis can also be seen.
Because immunodeficiency is not a prerequisite for infection, dogs with leishmaniasis
show an immunologic response to the organism. Resistance or susceptibility to clinical
leishmaniasis appears to be associated with the stimulation of a T helper-lor T helper-2
cell response, respectively.P" IL-2 and TNF-a seem to playa protective role,94a With
infection, serum levels of anti-Leishmania IgG, IgM, IgA, and circulating immune complexes increase and, with high titer, predispose to renal disease. 102, 103, 105 With infection,
the number of C021 +, C05+, C04+, and C08+ cells decreases and the degree of
incompetence seems to influence the severity of clinical signs.62, 63, 66, 106 Early in experimental infection, the dog develops a cell-mediated immune response to the organism but
this can disappear with the onset of clinical signs.ll B With a persistent cell-mediated
response, the dog's clinical signs are absent or milder and the number of organisms found
in the tissues is fewer. 62, 66, 85
The differential diagnosis includes pemphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus erythematosus,
zinc-responsive dermatosis, necrolytic migratory erythema, sebaceous adenitis, and lymphoma. Laboratory findings usually include nonregenerative anemia, hyperglobulinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, and proteinuria.
Tests for immune-mediated diseases (Coornb's tests, ANA, lupus erythematosus preparation, rheumatoid factor) can be positive in dogs with Ielshmaniasis.P: 94a The frequency
of a clinically insignificant positive ANA titer varies from 16% to over 80% of dogs
tested.P 94, 104 Because many of the clinical signs of leishmaniasis overlap with those of
systemic lupus erythematosus, immunodiagnostic test results must be interpreted carefully
when a dog comes from an endemic area.

FIGURE 7-19. Onychogryposis in
a dog with leishmaniasis, (Courtesy A.
Koutinas.)

536 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
Demonstration of anti-Leishmania antibodies, positive skin test reaction," or the
organism itself confirms the diagnosis. Although dogs can have positive serologic test
results in the absence of clinical disease, spontaneous elimination of the parasite is rare;
therefore, positive test results indicate infection.' Various serologic tests are available
(IFA, ELISA, Dot-ELISA) and the published sensitivity and specificity vary with the test,
population being studied, and investigator. 50, 84, 94, 118., !27, !28 No test is 100% accurate, with
false-negative results reported in more than 10% of infected dogs tested. The test method
also dictates whether the test can be used to monitor response to treatment. For that
purpose, the indirect immunofluorescence test (IFA) is recommended.s- !3! Amastigotes
are most easily seen with Ciemsa's stain and are found most often in smears from lymph
nodes or bone marrow (Fig. 7-20). Identification in other tissues is more difficult and
often unrewarding. Lymph node cytology is positive in about 85% of the clinically ill dogs,
whereas IFA is positive in about 97%.94. In early clinical disease, cytology may be positive
when serology is negative. 94 ' There is no correlation of severity of clinical signs with
serological titer. 94•
Skin biopsy findings vary considerably, Orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis
are usually prominent; the inflammatory infiltrate typically consists of macrophages with
fewer numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Granulomatous perifolliculitis (Fig. 721), interstitial dermatitis, superficial and deep perivascular dermatitis, lichenoid interface
dermatitis, nodular dermatitis, lobular panniculitis, suppurative folliculitis, and intraepidermal pustular dermatitis (Fig. 7-22) are the nine inflammatory patterns that have been
recognized in leishmaniasis; this large number reflects the clinical variability of the disease.?' The three most common patterns are granulomatous perifolliculitis, superficial and
deep perivascular dermatitis, and interstitial dermatitis. It is common for a dog to have
more than one pattern of inflammation present. In the perifollicular pattern, total obliteration of the sebaceous glands occurs in approximately 45% of the cases. This sebaceous
destruction no doubt contributes to the high frequency of clinical exfoliation. The Leishmania organisms are found intracellularly and extracellularly in approximately 50% of
cases. They are round to oval, 2 to 4 /-Lm in size, and contain a round, basophilic nucleus
and a small, rodlike kinetoplast. Although they are visible in routine stains, Leishmania
organisms are best seen when Giemsa stain is used. Immunohistochemical techniques
facilitate the identification of the organlsm." peR is at least as sensitive as immunohistochemical detection of Leishmania in biopsy specimens, and may be positive when the
latter is negative.n 9 •

FIGURE 7-20. Macrophage containing numerous Leishman-Donovan bodies. (Courtesy T. French.)

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 537

FIGURE 7-21. Perifollicular
granulomatous dermatitis in a dog
with visceral leishmaniasis.

FIGURE 7-22. Intraepidermal pustular dermatitis in a dog with visceral leishmaniasis.

538 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
Dogs with visceral leishmaniasis show increased levels of IgG-2 specifically directed
against O-acetylated sialic acids during active disease, and these antibodies have 96.6%
sensitivity and 75% specificity."
At present, canine leishmaniasis is considered an incurable disease in the vast majority
of cases. Treatments can bring about a clinical cure, but relapses months to years after
treatment are to be expected. These relapses are probably due to incomplete eradication
of the parasite, but could also represent reinfection. Accordingly, with the poor prognosis
for cure and the possible reservoir status of the dog for human infection, euthanasia may
be indicated. In endemic areas, insect control measures can be beneficial in reducing the
rate of insect feeding and, hopefully, infection.P
When treatment is indicated, the most widely used treatment is meglumine antimonate. 1, 82 Dosages vary with the study and range from 20 to 50 mglkg given subcutaneously
twice daily to 200 to 300 mglkg given intravenously every other day.73., 118b, 124, 126 Remission rates approaching 85% can be achieved with a large number of injections.P: 124 but
parasitologic cure rates are much lower. Studies in humans and dogs have suggested that
the antileishmanial activity of liposome-encapsulated meglumine antimonate is vastly superior to that of the unencapsulated drug. 70, 125 Other drugs that have been used in canine
leishmaniasis include aminosidine, 114, 132 amphotericin B,95 allopurinol,67.,97, 129, 130 metronidazole, and ketoconazole. Allopurinol has been receiving widest attention because of its
low cost and safety."? With daily dosages of 11 to 15 mglkg, clinical cure is achieved in
most cases, but parasitologic cure is rare. Various drug combinations have been studied,
with meglumine antimonate and allopurinol receiving widest usage. 73, 73., 88, 109 In one
study, the combination of meglumine and allopurinol was more effective than either
product alone.P' The addition of allopurinol improves the clinical response rate, and its
use on a daily basis for 1 week each month appears to prevent relapse. However, the rate
of parasitologic cure is not impacted. The most helpful new treatment is an admixture of
chemotherapy and immunotherapy with LiF2 antigen, an antigen derived from L. infantum. 107 Simultaneous use of this antigen and meglumine resulted in parasitologic cure in
all cases tested.
There is no correlation between serologic titers and clinical signs in treated or
untreated dogsY4. High titers often persist in clinically cured animals and cannot be used
to monitor progress of therapy or to confirm complete cure. 94• Antigen-specific lymphoproliferative responses do reappear in successfully treated dogs.ll s, Leishmania organisms
can often be demonstrated cytologically, by culture, or by peR in successfully treated
dogs. 67., 11Sb Thus, these dogs remain important carriers and reservoirs.
Successful treatment of feline leishmaniasis has not been reported.

• REFERENCES
General Textbook Sources
1. Greene CEo Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat,
2nd ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1998.
2. Scott OW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology, 5th ed. W. B. Saunders, Co, Philadelphia, 1995,

Viral Diseases
3. Agut M, et al: Autovaccination as a treatment in canine papillomavirus dermatological disease: A study of
nine cases, Biomed Letters 54(213):23, 1996.
4. Baer KE, Helton K: Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in cats. Vet
Pathol 30:535, 1993.
4a. Baxby 0, Bennett M: Cowpox: A re-evaluation of
the risks of human infection based on new epidemiclogical information. Arch ViroI13:1, 1997.
4b. Began M, et al: The population dynamics of cowpox
virus infection in bank voles: Testing fundamental assumptions. Ecology Letters 1:82, 1998.

5. Bennett M, et al: Feline cowpox virus infection.
J Small Anim Pract 31:167, 1990.
6. Bennett M, Baxby 0: Feline and human cowpox. Vet
Ann 35:229, 1995.
7. Bennett, M, et al: The laboratory diagnosis of orthopox virus infection in the domestic cat. J Small Anim
Pract 26:653, 1985.
7a. Burgesser KM, et al: Comparison of PCR, virus isolation, and indirect fluorescent antibody staining in
the detection of naturally occurring feline herpesvirus
infections. J Vet Diagn Invest 11:122, 1999.
8. Canese MG, et al: Feline poxvirus infection. A case
report. Schweizer Archiv fur Tierheilkunde 139:454,
1997.
9. Carney HC, et al: Papillomavirus infection of aged
Persian cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:294, 1990.
10. Carpenter JL, et al: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
viral papilloma on an eyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol 3:
187, 1992.

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases •
11. Chalmers S, et al: Demodicosis in two cats seropositive for feline immunodeficiency virus. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 194:256, 1989.
11a. Chantrey J, et al: Cowpox-reservoir hosts and
geographic distribution. Epidemiol Infect 122:455,
1999.
12. Clark EG, et al: Primary viral skin disease in three
cats caused by three different viruses and confirmed
by immunohistochemical and/or electron microscopic
techniques on formalin-fixed tissue. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
9:56, 1993.
13. Cooper LM, Sabine M: Paw and mouth disease in a
cat. Aust Vet J 48:644, 1972.
14. Egberink HF, et al: Isolation and identification of a
poxvirus from a domestic cat and a human contact
case. J Vet Med [Br] 33:237, 1986.
15. Egberink HE, et al: Papillomavirus associated skin
lesions in a cat seropositive for feline immunodeficiency virus. Vet Microbiol 31:117, 1992.
16. Flecknell PA, et al: Skin ulceration associated with
herpesvirus infection in cats. Vet Rec 104:313, 1979.
17. Gross TL, et al: Multifocal intraepidermal carcinoma
in a dog histologically resembling Bowen's disease.
Am J Dermatopathol 8:509, 1986.
18. Gross, TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology.
Mosby- Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1992, p 340.
19. Gross TL, et al: Giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats. Vet DermatoI4:117, 1993.
19a. Groux D, et al: La poxvirose feline: A propos de
deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:215, 1999.
19b. Haines DM, et al: Immunohistochemical detection
of canine distemper virus in haired skin, nasal mucosa, and footpad epithelium: A method for antemortem diagnosis of infection. J Vet Diagn Invest 11:396,
1999.
20. Hamblet CN: Parapoxvirus in a cat. Vet Rec 132:144,
1993.
20a. Hara M, et al: A natural case of Aujeszky's disease
in the cat in Japan. J Vet Med Sci 53:947, 1991.
21. Hargis AM, et al: Ulcerative facial and nasal dermatitis and stomatitis in cats associated with feline herpes
1. Vet Dermatol 10:267, 1999.
21a. Hinrichs U, et al: Necrotizing pneumonia in a cat
caused by an orthopox virus. J Comp Pathol 121:191,
1999.
22. Hoover EA, Mullins JI: Feline leukemia virus infection and diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1287,
1991.
23. Howard DR: Pseudorabies in dogs and cats. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 1071.
24. LeClerc SM, et al: Papillomavirus infection in association with feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
in situ. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 13:125, 1997.
24a. LeNet JL, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules associated with a novel canine papillomavirus in
an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
25. Love DN, et al: Feline calicivirus associated with pyrexia, profound anorexia, and oral and perineal ulceration in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 17:136, 1987.
26. Maeda, H, et al: Distemper skin lesions in a dog.
J Vet Med A 42:247, 1994.
27. Maenhout T, et al: Drie Gevallen Van Koepokkeninfektie bij de Kat in Belgie. V1aams. Diergenerskd
Tijdschr 60:66, 1991.
28. Maggs DJ, et al: Evaluation of serologic and viral

539

detection methods for diagnosing feline herpesvirus-l
infection in cats with acute respiratory tract or
chronic ocular disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:502,
1999.
29. Maggs DJ: Update of feline herpesvirus (FHV-l).
Proc Am Coli Vet Int Med 16:613, 1998.
30. Mancianti F, et al: Mycological findings in feline immunodeficiency virus-infected cats. J Med Vet Mycol
30:257, 1992.
31. Miller WH Jr, et al: Multicentric squamous cell carcinomas in situ resembling Bowen's disease in five cats.
Vet Dermatol 3:177, 1992.
32. Monroe WE: Clinical signs associated with pseudorabies in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:599, 1989.
33. Nagata M, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with
papillomavirus infections in dogs: is this epidermodysplasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6:179, 1995.
34. Naidoo J, et al: Characterization of orthopoxviruses
isolated from feline infections in Britain. Arch Virol
125:261, 1992.
34a. Nicholls PK, et al: Naturally occurring, nonregressing canine oral papillomavirus infection: Host immunity, virus characterization, and experimental infection. Virol 265:365, 1999.
34b. Nicholls PK, Stanley MA: Canine papillomavirus-a
centenary review. J Comp Pathol 120:219, 1999.
35. Nowotny N, et al: Poxvirus infection in the domestic
cat: Clinical, histopathological, virological, and epidemiologtcal studies. Wien Tierarztl Mschr 81:362,
1994.
36. Olivry T: Newly recognized feline dermatoses: selected topics. Proc DVM Fall Seminar, Keywest,
1997, p 29.
37. Orth G, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules
associated with a novel canine papillomavirus in an
immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
38. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet. Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 14:31, 1998.
39. Sato R, et al: Oral administration of bovine lactoferrin
for treatment of intractable stomatitis in feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-positive and FlV-negative
cats. Am J Vet Res. 57(10):1443, 1996.
40. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 6:331, 1980.
41. Scott DW: Large Animal Dermatology. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1988.
42. Setsuko TOI, et al: Histopathological features of stomatitis in cats spontaneously infected with feline immunodeficiency virus. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 47:331,
1994.
42a. Smith KC, et al: Skin lesions caused by orthopoxvirus infection in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 40:495,
1999.
42b. Sundberg JP, et al: Feline papillomas and papillomaviruses. Vet Pathol 37:1, 2000.
42c. Suchy A, et al: Diagnosis of feline herpesvirus infection by immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction, and in situ hybridization. J Vet Diagn Invest
12:186, 2000.
43. Thomsett LR: Feline poxvirus infection. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B. Saunders
Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p. 605.
44. Vestey JP, et al: What is human catpoxlcowpox infection? Int J Dennatol 30:696, 1991.
45. von Bomhard D, et al: Zur Epidemiologie, Klink,
Pathologie und Virologie der Katzen-Pocken-Infektion. Kleintierpraxis 37:219, 1992.

540 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
45a. Wienecke R, et al: Cowpow virus infection in an 11year-old girl. J Am Acad Dermatol 42:892, 2000.
46. Wilkinson GT, et al: Possible "orf" (contagious pustular dermatitis, contagious ecthyma of sheep) infection
in the dog. Vet Rec 87:766, 1970.
47. Wojciechowski J, et al: Herpesvirus dermatitis in a
cat. Proc 14th Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Call Vet
Dermatol, 1998, p 85.
48. Yamamoto JK, et al: Epidemiologic and clinical aspects of feline immunodeficiency virus infection in
cats from the continental United States and Canada
and possible mode of transmission. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 194:213, 1989.
49. Zenger E: FIP, FELV, FIV: Making a diagnosis. Proc
Am Call Vet Int Med 16:407, 1998.

Rickettsial Diseases
50. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Prednisolone at anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive dosages in conjunction
with doxycycline does not potentiate the severity of
Rickettsia rickettsii infection in dogs. Antimicrob
Agents Chemother 41:141, 1997.
51. Carlotti DN, Bensingnor, E: Manifestations dermatologiques de l'ehrlichiose canine. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 31:325, 1996.
52. Greene CE, et al: Rocky Mountain spotted fever in
dogs and its differentiation from canine ehrlichiosis.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:465, 1985.
53. Gretillati S: Feline haemobartonellosis. Feline Pract
14:22, 1984.
54. Frank LA: Cutaneous lesions associated with ehrlichiosis in a dog. Vet Allergy Clin Imrnunol 4:90,
1997.
55. Rutgers C, et al: Severe Rocky Mountain spotted fever in five dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:361,
1985.
56. Weiser ID, et al: Dermal necrosis associated with
Rocky Mountain spotted fever in four dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 195:1756, 1989.

Protozoal Diseases
57. Acedo-Sanchez C, et al. Changes in antibody titres
against Leishmania infantum in naturally infected
dogs in southern Spain. Vet Parasitol 75:1, 1998.
58. Barber JS, Trees AJ: Naturally occurring vertical
transmission of Neospora caninum in dogs. Intrnatl.
J Parasitol 28:57, 1998.
59. Bames JC, et al: Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis in a
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:416, 1993.
60. Bernadina WE, et al: An immunodiffusion assay for
the detection of canine leishmaniasis due to infection
with Leishmania infantum. Vet Parasitol 73:207,
1997.
61. Binazzi M: Profile of cutaneous toxoplasmosis. Int J
Dermatol 25:357, 1986.
62. Bourdoiseau G, et al: Specific IgGI and IgG2 antibody and lymphocyte subset levels in naturally Leishmania itifantum-infected treated and untreated dogs.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 59:21, 1997.
63. Bourdoisea G, et al: Lymphocyte subset abnormalities
in canine leishmaniasis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
56:345, 1997.
64. Bourdoiseau G, et al: Immunohistochemical detection
of Leishmania infantum in formalin-fixed, paraffinembedded sections of canine skin and lymph nodes.
J Vet Diagn Invest 9:439, 1997.
65. Bravo L, et al: Canine leishmaniasis in the United
States. Comp Cont Educ 15:699, 1993.
66. Cabral M, et al: The immunology of canine leishman-

iasis: Strong evidence for a developing spectrum from
asymptomatic dogs. Vet Parasitol 76:173, 1998.
67. Capelli, JL, et al: La babesiose canine, maladie 11
complexes immuns: A propos d'un cas de vascularite
11 manifestations cutanees, Prat Med Chir Anim
Camp 31:231, 1996.
67a. Cavaliero T, et al: Clinical, serologic, and parasitologic follow-up after long-term allopurinol therapy of
dogs naturally infected with Leishmania infantum. J
Vet Intern Med 13:330, 1999.
68. Cardoso L, et al: Use of a leishmanin skin test in the
detection of canine LeishTlUlnia-specific cellular immunity. Vet Parasitol 79:213, 1998.
69. Carlotti DN, et al: Skin lesions in canine babesiosis.
In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993,
p 229.
70. Chapman WL, et al: Antileishmanial activity of liposome-encapsulated meglumine antimonate in the dog.
Am J Vet Res 45:1028, 1984.
71. Chatterjee M, et al: Diagnostic and prognostic potential of antibodies against O-acetylated sialic acids in
canine visceral leishmaniasis. Vet Imrnunol Immunopathol 70:55, 1999.
72. Ciaramella P, et al: A retrospective clinical study of
canine leishmaniasis in 150 dogs naturally infection by
Leishmania irifantum. Vet Bee 141:539, 1997.
73. Denerolle P: Leishmaniose canine: difficultes du diagnostic et du traitement (125 cas). Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 31:137, 1996.
73a. Denerolle P, Bourdoiseau G: Combination allopurinol and antimony treatment versus antimony alone
and allopurinol alone in the treatment of canine
leishmaniasis (96 cases). J Vet Intern Med 13:413,
1999.
74. Dietze R, et al: Effect of eliminating seropositive canines on the transmission of visceral leishmaniasis in
Brazil. Clin Infect Dis 25:1240, 1997.
75. Dubey JP, et al: Newly recognized fatal protozoan
disease of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1296, 1989.
76. Dubey JP, et al: Caryospora-associated dermatitis in
dogs. J Parasitol 76:552, 1990.
77. Dubey JP, et al: Fatal cutaneous and visceral infection in a rottweiler dog associated with a sarcocystislike protozoan. J Vet Diagn Invest 3:72, 1991.
78. Dubey JP, Carpenter JL: Histologically confirmed
clinical toxoplasmosis in cats: 100 cases 0952-1990).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1556, 1993.
79. Dubey JP, et al: Canine cutaneous neosporosis: clinical improvement with clindamycin. Vet Dermatol 6:
37, 1995.
80. Dubey JP, Lindsay DS: A review of Neospora caninum and neosporosis. Vet Parasitol 67:1, 1996.
81. Edelhofer VR, et al: Importierte Leishmaniose-falle
bei Hunden in Osterreich-eine rerospektive studie
von 1985-1994. Wien Tierarztl Mschr 82:90, 1995.
82. Ferrer L: Leishmaniasis. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W. B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 266.
83. Ferrer L, et al: Serological diagnosis and treatment of
canine leishmaniasis. Vet Rec 136:514, 1995.
84. Fisa R, et al: Serological diagnosis of canine leishmaniasis by dot-ELISA. J Vet Diagn Invest 9:50,
1997.
84a. Fisa R, et al: Epidemiology of canine leishmaniasis
in Catalonia (Spain). The example of the priorat focus. Vet Parasitol 83:87, 1999.
85. Fondevila D, et al: Epidermal immunocompetence in

Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases • 541
canine leishmaniasis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 56:
319, 1997.
86. Font A, et aI: Canine mucosal leishmaniasis. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:131, 1996.
87. Fritz D, et al: Neospora caninurn: Associated nodular
dermatitis in a middle-aged dog. Can Pract 22:21,
1997.
88. Ginel PJ, et aI: Use of allopurinol for maintenance of
remission in dogs with leishmaniasis. J Small Anim
Pract 39:271, 1998.
89. Ginel PJ, et al: Use of allopurinol for maintenance of
remission in dogs with leishmaniasis. J Small Anim
Pract 39:271, 1998.
90. Greig B, et aI: Neospora caninurn pneumonia in an
adult dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1000, 1995.
91. Hyman JA, et aI: Specificity of polymerase chain reaction identification of Toxoplasma gondii infection in
paraffin-embedded animal tissues. J Vet Diagn Invest
7-275, 1995.
92. Killick KR, et aI: Protection of dogs from bites of
phlebotomine sandflies by deltamethrin collars for
control of canine leishmaniasis. Med Vet Entomol 22:
105, 1997.
93. Kirkpatrick CE, et al: Leishmania chagasi and L. donovani: Experimental infections in domestic cats. Exp
Parasitol 58:125, 1984.
94. Koutinas AF, et aI: Skin lesions in canine Leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar): A clinical and histopathologic study
on 22 spontaneous cases in Greece. Vet Dermatol 3:
121, 1993.
94a. Koutinas AF, et aI: Clinical considerations on canine
visceral leishmaniasis in Greece: A retrospective study
of 158 cases (1989-1996). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
35:376, 1999.
95. Lamothe J: Essai de traitement de la leishmaniose
canine par l'amphotericine B (39 cas). Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 32:133, 1997.
96. Laruelle-Magalon C, Toga I: Un cas de leishmaniose
feline. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31:255, 1996.
97. Lester SJ, Kenyon JE: Use of allopurinol to treat
visceral leishmaniasis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
209:615, 1996.
98. Lindsay DS, et aI: Examination of the activities of 43
chemotherapeutic agents against Neospora caninurn
tachyzoites in cultures cells. Am J Vet Res 55:976,
1994.
99. Lindsay DS, et aI: Feline toxoplasmosis and the importance of the Toxoplasma gondii oocyst. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:488, 1997.
99a. Lindsay DS, et al: Neospora caninurn and the potential for parasite transmission. Compend Con tin Educ
Pract Vet 21:317, 1999.
100. Liste F, Gascon M: Allopurinol in the treatment
of canine visceral leishmaniasis. Vet Rec 137-23,
1995.
101. Lobetti RG: Canine babesiosis. Comp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 20:418, 1998.
102. Lopez R, et al: Circulating immune complexes and
renal function in canine leishmaniasis. J Vet Med B
43:469, 1996.
103. Lucena R, et aI: Third component of complement
serum levels in dogs with leishmaniasis. J Vet Med
[Am] 41:48, 1994.
104. Lucena R, et aI: Antinuclear antibodies in dogs with
leishmaniasis. J Vet Med A 43:255, 1996.
105. Margarito JM, et aI: Levels of IgM and IgA circulating immune complexes in dogs with leishmaniasis.
J Vet Med B 45:263, 1998.

106. Martinez-Moreno A, et al: Humoral and ceIl-mediated immunity in natural and experimental canine
leishmaniasis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 48:209,
1995.
106a. Mozos E, et aI: Leishmaniasis and generalized demodicosis in three dogs: A clinicopathological and immunohistochemical study. J Comp Pathol 120:257,
1999.
107. Neogy AB, et aI: Exploitation of parasite-derived antigen in therapeutic success against canine visceral
leishmaniasis. Vet Parasitol 54:367, 1994.
108. Odin M, Dubey JP: Sudden death associated with
Neospora caninurn myocarditis in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 203:831, 1993.
109. Oliva G, et al: Comparative efficacy of meglumine
antimoniate and aminosidine sulphate, alone or in
combination, in canine leishmaniasis. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 92:165, 1998.
110. Opitz M: Hautmanifestationen bei der Leishmaniose
des Hudes. Tierarztl Prax 24:284, 1996.
111. Ozon C, et al: Disseminated feline leishmaniasis due
to Leishmania infantum in southern France. Vet Parasitol 75:273, 1998.
112. Perl S, et aI: Pyogranulomatous dermatitis associated
with Neospora caninurn in a dog. World Small Anim
Vet Assoc 21:417, 1996.
113. Perl S, et aI: Cutaneous neosporosis in a dog in Israel. Vet Parasitol 79:257, 1998.
114. Poli A, et al: Comparison of aminosidine (paromomycin) and sodium stibogluconate for treatment of canine leishmaniasis. Vet Parasitol 71:263, 1997.
115. Poli A, et al: Neospora caninum infection in a Bernese cattle dog from Italy. Vet Parasitol 79:79, 1998.
115a. Prats N, Ferrer L: A possible mechanism in the
pathogenesis of cutaneous lesions in canine leishmaniasis. Vet Rec 137:103, 1995.
116. Pumarola M, et al: Canine leishmaniasis associated
with systemic vasculitis in two dogs. J Comp Pathol
105:279, 1991.
117. Rasmussen K, Jensen AL: Some epidemiologic features of canine neosporosis in Denmark. Vet Parasitol
6:345, 1996.
118. Rhalem A, et aI: Immune response against Leishmania antigens in dogs naturally and experimentally
infection with Leishmania infantum. Vet Parasitol 81:
173, 1999.
118a. Rhalem A, et aI: Analysis of immune responses in
dogs with canine visceral leishmaniasis before, and
after, drug treatment. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
71:69, 1999.
118b. Riera C, et aI: Serological and parasitological followup in dogs experimentally infected with Leishmania
infanturn and treated with meglumine antimoniate.
Vet Parasitol 84:33, 1999.
119. Romand S, et aI: Direct agglutination test for serologic diagnosis of Neospora caninum infection. Parasitol Res 84:50, 1998.
119a. Roura X, et al: Detection of Leishmania infection in
paraffin-embedded skin biopsies of dogs using polymerase chain reaction. J Vet Diagn Invest 11:385, 1999.
120. Ruehlmann D, et aI: Canine neosporosis: a case report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
31:174, 1995.
121. Sangster LT, et aI: Coccidia associated with cutaneous
nodules in a dog. Vet Pathol 22:186, 1985.
122. Sellon R: Leishmaniasis in the United States. In: Kirk
GW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy
XI. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 271.

542 • Viral, Rickettsial, and Protozoal Skin Diseases
123. Shelton GC, et al: A coccidia-like organism associated
with subcutaneous granulomata in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 152:263, 1968.
123a. Sideris V, et al: Asymptomatic canine leishmaniasis
in greater Athens area, Greece. Eur J Epidemiol 15:
271, 1999.
124. Slappendel RJ, Teske E: The effect of intravenous or
subcutaneous administration of meglumine antimonate (Glucantime) in dogs with leishmaniasis. A randomized clinical trial. Vet Quart 19:10, 1997.
125. Valladares JE, et al: Pharmacokinetics of liposomeencapsulated meglumine antimonate after intramuscular and subcutaneous administration in dogs. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 57-403, 1997.
126. Valladares JE, et al: Pharmacokinetics of meglumine
antimoniate after administration of a multiple dose in
dogs experimentally infected with Leishmania infantum. Vet Parasitol 75:33, 1998.
127. Vercammen F, et al: Development of a slide ELISA
for canine leishmaniasis and comparison with four
serological tests. Vet Rec 141:328, 1997.

128. Vercammen F, et al: A sensitive and specific 30-min
Dot-ELISA for the detection of anti-Leishmania antibodies in the dog. Vet Parasitol 79:221, 1998.
129. Vercammen F, et al: First evaluation of the use of
allopurinol as a single drug for the treatment of canine leishmaniasis. Vlaams Diergeneeskd Tijdschr 64:
208, 1995.
130. Vercammen F, De Deken R: Treatment of canine
visceral leishmaniasis with allopurinol. Vet Rec 137:
252, 1995.
131. Vercammen F, De Deken R: Antibody kinetics during allopurinol treatment in canine leishmaniasis. Vet
Rec 138:264, 1996.
132. Vexenat JA, et al: Clinical recovery and limited cure
in canine visceral leishmaniasis treated with aminosidine (paromomycin). Am J Trap Med Hyg 58:448,
1998.
133. Zaffaroni E, et al: Epidemiological patterns of canine
leishmaniosis in Western Liguria (Italy). Vet Parasitol
81:11, 1999.

Chapter

8
Skin Immune System and
Allergic Skin Diseases

T

he subject of immunodermatology has seen a tremendous emergence of new discoveries, findings, and laboratory techniques. An adequate review of this information is
decidedly beyond the scope of this chapter. For the practitioner, student, and academician
interested in details, numerous texts on immunology and immunodermatology are available, and a number of review articles can be recommended." In this discussion, we
confine ourselves to a brief overview of the concepts regarding immunology of the skin.
To comprehend this discussion or to read the current scientific literature on many cutaneous diseases, the reader has to understand some newer terminology about cell surface
antigens, cytokines, and adhesion molecules, which are basic components of all immunologic discussions .

• SURFACE ANTIGENS (DETERMINANTS) OR RECEPTOR
TERMINOLOGY
The understanding of current literature involving immune responses requires an understanding of cell surface determinants, which are referred to by the cluster differentiation
(CD) nomenclature. This nomenclature is applied to antigens that have been detected on
the surface of cells with monoclonal antibodies, and these are usually assigned a number.
Initially these antigens were studied and shown to be specific to or limited to a specific
group of cell types. This allowed us to identify what types of cells are present in tissues or
exudates. Further studies have allowed us to recognize the function and, in many cases,
the structure of these antigens. It is now known that many of the surface molecules are
various immunoglobulins, carbohydrates, enzymes, adhesion molecules to bind with other
cells, and receptors for the various immunoglobulins and chemicals (cytokines) secreted by
cells to communicate with surrounding cells. In humans, this list of cell surface determinants has grown to well over 100 and appears to grow faster each year. Work in dogs and
cats is allowing us to recognize some of these determinants in small animals as well (Table
8_1).1°,21,52

Cytokines
Cytokines are secreted from cells and function in communicating with surrounding cells
(Table 8-2). They are soluble proteins or glycoproteins that affect the growth, differentiation, function, and activation functions of other cells. These soluble hormone-like molecules were initially discovered in association with lymphocytes and called lymphokines or
with monocytes and called monokines. Because it was discovered that many other cells
produced the same substances, these terms, and others such as secretory regulins and
peptide regulatory factors, were no longer considered appropriate.
Cytokines are transiently produced and exert their biological activities via specific cellsurface receptors of target cells, which may be expressed only after activation of the

"See references 4, 5, 9, 14, 16, 20, 22, 23, 30, 36, 42, 49, 50, 54, 58, 60, 61, 69, 72, 75-77.

543

544 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

• Table 8-1
ANTIGEN
FAMILY

COl

TCRlCD3

GLOSSARY OF LEUKOCYTE ANTIGENS'"
ANTIGEN

COMMENT

CDla
COlb
CDlc
TCRa{3
TCR')'8
CD3

CD I antigens are expressed in cortical thymocytes but not on mature
T cells. CD I molecules are the best markers of dendritic/APC,
although subpopulations of B cells and monocytes express CDlc.
The T-cell receptor/CD3 complex is only expressed on the surface of
mature T cells. There are two types of TCR: a{3 and ')'8; each is
associated with the CD3 complex, which is the signal transduction
portion of both types of receptor.
Expressed by MHC class II-restricted T-helper cells. Macrophages
and dendritidAPC can upregulate CD4 in some instances.
Expressed by almost all mature T cells; a minor subset of B cells can
express CD5 (BI cells). CD5 binds to CD72 which is expressed on
B cells.
Expressed by MHC class I-restricted T cytotoxic cells. T cells usually
express CD8a{3 heterodimers.
The {32 integrins (CDll/CDI8) are the major adhesion molecule family
of leukocytes. Most leukocytes express one or more members of this
family. CD 18 is the {32 subunit that pairs with one of four a-subunits
to form a heterodimer. The a-subunits are: CDlla (all leukocytes),
CDllb (granulocytes, monocytes, some macrophages), CDllc (granulocytes, monocytes, dendritic antigen-presenting cells). Macrophages and granulocytes express lO-fold more CDI8 than do lymphocytes.
Receptor for LPS (endotoxin) and LPS binding protein complexes.
CDI4 is expressed on monocytes, subsets of macrophages, and subsets of B cells.
CD21 is a C3dg receptor (CR2) that complexes with components of
the B-cell antigen receptor complex (slg, CD79a, CD79b), CDI9,
and CD35 (CRI). CD21 is expressed on mature B cells and follicular dendritic cells of the germinal center.
A broadly expressed adhesion receptor (for hyaluronate) on many cell
types; involved in lymphocyte trafficking and activation.
CD45 is the leukocyte common antigen family. CD45RA is one of
these isoforms. CD45RA is expressed by all B cells and by 100% of
B-cell lymphomas involving lymph nodes. In skin disease, CD45RA
is expressed by mast cell tumors, plasmacytomas, and rarely by
T-cell lymphomas.
VLA family (CD49a-f) members (a-subunits) occur as heterodimers
with the {31-integrin subunit. VLA-4 (CD49d) is broadly expressed
on leukocytes. VLA-4 is upregulated on memory T cells.
Intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM) family consists of at least four
members. ICAM-I (CD54) is broadly expressed (leukocytes, endothelium) and is a major ligand of CDlla. CD54 is upregulated on
endothelium, leukocytes, and even on epithelium in inflammation
(by inflammatory cytokines) and is important in leukocyte transmigration. Expression of CD54 on dendritidAPC enhances T-cell activation through CDlla. ICAM-3 (CD50) is expressed broadly by
leukocytes but rarely occurs on endothelium.
Neural cell adhesion molecule isoform; marker of NK cells in humans.
Thy-I expression varies considerably among different species. Dogs
express Thy-Ion thymocytes and T cells (similar to mice); expression of Thy-I in human T cells is lost at the early stages of thymocyte maturation; peripheral T cells lack Thy-I expression. Thy-I is
highly expressed by dermal dendritidAPC and fibroblasts. It is an
important marker in proliferative-diseases of dendritic/APC in dogs
(e.g., cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis). Thy-I is expressed also
by monocytes and eosinophtls but not by neutrophils in the dog.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules present
exogenously derived antigen CD4- T cells. MHC class II molecules
are highly expressed on dendritidAPC, B cells, resting (dog and cat!)
and activated T cells (dog, cat, and human), and monocytes. Granulocytes do not express MHC class II. MHC class II can be upregulated on epithelial cells (e.g., keratinocytes) and endothelial cells by
interferon-yo
Table continued on following page

CD4

CD4

CD5

CD5

CD8

CD8a
CD8{3
CDlla
CD lIb
CDllc
C0l8

{32 Integrins

CDI4

C0l4

CD21

CD21

Link

CD44

CD45

CD45
CD45RA
CD45R

{31 Integrins

CD49d-like

ICAM

CD50
CD54

NCAM
Thy-I

CD56
CD90

MHCII

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 545
• Table 8-1

GLOSSARY OF LEUKOCYTE ANTIGENS Continued

ANTIGEN
FAMILY

ANTIGEN

COMMENT

BCRlCD79

CD79a

The B-cell receptor complex (BCR) consists of surface Ig (sIg) complexed with two invariant molecules that function as signal transduction molecules (CD79a, CB79b). CD79a (MB-I) is expressed
throughout all stages of B-cell development and persists into the
plasma cell stage (despite absent or diminished sIg on plasma cells).
CD79a is a useful marker for establishing the diagnosis of B-cell
lymphoma because it is present in the BCR of all B cells regardless
of the isotype of the sIg receptor (background associated with Ig
stains in tissues is also not an issue). CD79a is useful in the diagnosis of cutaneous plasmacytoma (about 80% have focal to diffuse
expression) .

celp-9. 31. 50. 54. 80. 85 Each mediator usually has multiple overlapping activities. Numerous
cytokines have been described, and typically they may perform several different functions,
depending on the tissue they interact with and the other cytokines that may be present.
In different environments, the same cytokine may even have opposite effects.":" 50. 80
Cytokines may affect the same cell in a permissive, inhibitor, additive, or suppressive
manner. Cytokines are involved in virtually every facet of immunity and inflammation,
including antigen presentation, bone marrow differentiation, cellular recruitment and activation, adhesion molecule expression, and acute-phase reactions (see Table 8-2).7 The
particular cytokines produced in response to an immunologic insult determine whether an
immune response develops and whether the response is humoral, cell-mediated, or allergic. Certain cell types, particularly T lymphocytes, may secrete different patterns of
cytokines, and this has been used to subclassify these cells and their associated different
functions. A large group of cytokines have been identified that have as their sole or major
purpose the direction of the movement of cells involved in inflammation and the immune
response. These have been called chemokines (Table 8_3).3.50

Adhesion Molecules
Glycoproteins critical for cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix adhesion, contact, and communication, adhesion molecules play an integral role in cutaneous inflammation and immunology
(see Chap. 1) (Table 8_4).19.31.78.82 The integrin family includes membrane glycoproteins
with a and B subunits, such as vascular cell adhesion molecule-I (VCAM-I) on endothelial
cells, which binds T lymphocytes and monocytes via vascular leukocyte adherin-4 (VLA-4),
and fibronectin and laminin, which bind keratinocytes and mast cells. The immunoglobulin
gene superfamily contains intercellular adhesion molecule-I (ICAM-I) found on keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, and endothelial cells, which binds leukocytes via leukocyte function-associated antigen-I (LFA-I) or CDllalCDI8. The selectin family includes lectin
adhesion molecule-I (LECAM-I or L-selectin) on lymphocytes, which binds endothelial
leukocyte adhesion molecule-I (ELAM-I or E-selectin) and Gmp-I40 (P-selectin) as a
"homing" mechanism. The cadherin family members are important in desmosome function (see Chap. 1).

Major Histocompatibility Complex
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a cluster of genes that encodes a range of
molecules of fundamental importance to the immune system." MHC class I loci encode
the classic histocompatibility antigens, which are expressed by all nucleated cells of the
body and are target antigens in the rejection of incompatible tissue grafts. Products of the
MHC class III loci include a number of factors of the complement pathways, two
cytokines (TNF -a and TNF-/3), and two heat-shock proteins. The MHC class II loci

546 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Table 8-2

IMMUNOLOGIC PROPERTIES OF CYTOKINES

CYTOKINE

Inter/eukins
IL-l

IL-2
IL-3
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6

IL-7
IL-8
IL-9
IL-IO

IL-ll
IL-12
IL-13
IL-14
IL-15
IL-16
IL-17
IL-18

Colony-Stimulating Factors
Granulocyte CSF
Monocyte CSF
Granulocyte-monocyte
CSF
Basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF)
Platelet -derived growth
factor
Stem cell factor
Transforming growth
factor

Interferons
IFN-a
IFN-,B
IFN-y

PROPERTIES

Immunoaugmentation (promotes IL-2, IFN-a, colony-stimulating factor (CSF)
production by T cells); promotes B-cell activation (promotes IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-7 production and immunoglobulin synthesis); stimulates macrophages and
fibroblasts; induces arachidonate metabolism
Activates T and natural killer (NK) cells; promotes cell growth and immunoglobulin production; activates macrophages
Promotes growth of early myeloprogenitor cells, eosinophils, mast cells, and
basophils
Promotes B-cell activation and IgE switch; promotes T-cell growth; synergistic
with IL-3 for mast cell growth
Eosinophilic growth; B-cell growth and chemotaxis; T-cell growth
Terminal differentiation factor for cells and polyclonal immunoglobulin production; enhances IL-4 induced IgE production; promotes T-cell proliferation and
cytotoxicity; promotes NK-cell activity; activates neutrophils
Lymphopoietin
Chemoattractant for neutrophils, T lymphocytes, basophils, increases histamine
release from basophils
Maturation of erythroid progenitor cell tumor growth; synergistic with IL-3 for
mast cell growth
Downregulation (inhibits production of IL-l, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12,
TNF-a, IFN-y, MHC class II expression)
Megakaryocyte, lymphocyte, and plasma cell growth
Cytotoxic lymphocyte maturation; NK-cell activation and proliferation
Similar to IL-4; enhances production of MHC class II and integrins; reduced
production of IL-l and TNF; activation of eosinophils
Expands clones of B cells and suppresses immunoglobulin secretion
Proliferation; increased cytotoxicity of T cells, NK cells; expression of ICAM-3;
B-cell growth and differentiation
Chemoattractant, growth factor
Autocrine proliferation and activation
Similar to IL-12; inhibits IgE production by increasing IFN-y
Neutrophil growth
Monocyte growth
Monomyelocytic growth
Fibroblast growth and matrix production
Proliferation; chemoattractant for fibroblasts; active in wound healing
Chemoattractant; with IL-3 stimulates growth; also has histamine-releasing activity
Inhibits IL-2-stimulated growth; switch factor for IgA but inhibits IgM and IgG
production; counteracts IL-4 stimulation of IgE; inhibits cytotoxicity
Antiviral; antiproliferative; immunomodulating (activation of macrophages; proliferation of B cells; stimulation of NK cells); inhibit fibroblasts
Antiviral; antiproliferative; immunomodulating (activation of macrophages, proliferation of B cells, stimulation of NK cells); inhibit fibroblasts
Immunomodulation (activation of macrophages; proliferation of B cells; stimulation of NK cells); antiproliferative; antiviral; inhibit fibroblasts; inhibits IL-4mediated expression of IgE receptors and the IgE switch

Tumor Necrosis Factors
TNF-a
TNF-,B
TNF-,B,,2,3

Inflammatory, immunoenhancing, and tumoricidal
Inflammatory, immunoenhancing, and tumoricidal
Fibroplasia and immunosuppression

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 547
• Table 8-3

CHEMOKINES AND THEIR ACTIONS

CHEMOKINE

TARGET CELLS

BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS

B lymphocytes

Chemotaxis

Neutrophils
Fibroblasts
Neutrophils
Fibroblasts

Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; proliferation; activation
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; proliferation; activation

Neutrophils

Chemotaxis

Neutrophils

Chemotaxis; activation

Neutrophils
Basophils
T lymphocytes
Neutrophils
Basophils
T lymphocytes
B lymphs/B-CELL
Keratinocytes
Activated T lymphocytes
Monocytes
NK cells
Activated T lymphocytes

Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; inhibition of histamine release
Chemotaxis; inhibition of IL-4 synthesis
Chemotaxis; inhibition of growth and IgE production
Chemotaxis; expression of HLA-DR
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis

NK cells
Neutrophils

Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation

Neutrophils
Monocytes
Fibroblasts
Basophils
T lymphocytes

Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Modulation of histamine release
Chemotaxis

Monocytes
Resting T lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Eosinophils
Basophils
Resting T lymphocytes
Monocytes
T lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Monocytes
Monocytes
Basophils
T lymphocytes
NK cells
Dendritic cells
Monocytes
T lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
NK cells
Dendritic cells
Monocytes
T lymphocytes
Eosinophils

Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Table continued on following page

CXC (a) Family

BCA-1 (B-cell-attracting
chemokine-1 )
{3-TG ({3-thromboglobulin)
CTAP-III (connective tissue-activating peptide
III)
ENA-78 (epithelial cellderived neutrophilactivating peptide 78)
GCP-2 (granulocyte chemotactic protein 2)
GRO-a, {3, a (growth regulated oncogene)
IL-8 (tnterleukin-S)

IP-lO (interferon-inducible protein 10)
MIG (monokine induced
by l'-interferon)
NAP-2 (neutrophil-activating peptide 2)
PF-4 (platelet factor 4)

SDF-1 (stromal cellderived factor 1)
C-C ({3) Family

Ck{38 (chemokine {38)
Eotaxin
Eotaxin-2

HCC-2

MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein 1)

MCP-2

MCP-3

548 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Table 8-3

CHEMOKINES AND THEIR ACTIONS Continued

CHEMOKINE

TARGET CELLS

BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS

MCP-3 Continued

Basophils
NK cells
Dendritic cells
Eosinophils
Monocytes
T lymphocytes
Basophils
T lymphocytes
Monocytes/macrophages
B lymphocytes
NK cells
Basophils
Dendritic cells
NK cells
Dendritic cells
B lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
Dendritic cells

Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Increased IgE/lgG4 production
Chemotaxis; activation
Activation
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Chemotaxis
Increased IgE/IgG4 production
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis

Eosinophils
T lymphocytes
Monocytes
Basophils
NK cells
B lymphocytes
Dendritic cells
T lymphocytes

Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation
Increased IgE/IgG4 production
Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis

Activated T lymphocytes

Chemotaxis

Lymphocytes
Activated NK cells

Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis; activation

Monocytes
T lymphocytes

Chemotaxis
Chemotaxis

MCP-4

MIP-la (macrophage inflammatory protein la
or LD-78; also known
as endogenous pyrogen)

MIP-I,B
NIP-3a (also known as
Exodus of liver and activation-regulated chemokine [LARC])
RANTES (regulated upon
activation normal
T cells expressed and
presnmably secreted)

SLC (secondary lymphoid
tissue chemokine)
STCP-I (stimulated T-cell
chemotactic protein)

C (y) Family
Lymphotactin
CX3C Family

Fractalkine

encode a series of transmembrane molecules with restricted expression by cells of the
immune system, particularly the antigen-presenting cells: Langerhans' cells, dendrocytes,
macrophages, and B lymphocytes.
In normal skin, low numbers (mean, 1.6 cells/HPF) of MHC class II and Langerhans'
cells were demonstrated." Increased numbers of MHC class II and Langerhans' cells
were visible in the epidermis of dogs with discoid lupus erythematosus, allergic skin
disease, and deep bacterial pyoderma, but not in pemphigus foliaceus."

Skin-Associated Lymphoid Tissue
The immune system and its inflammatory component are complex models of biological
activity and interaction. There is a tendency to dissect the immune response into its
individual components and to discuss them as autonomous functional units. Immune
responses are interwoven and interdependent, however, and manipulation of one component influences others. Newer studies have shown that the skin itself is a very integral and
active component of the immune system. These observations led to the hypothesis that
the skin, like the gastrointestinal tract, may be a functioning lymphoid organ; as such, it
has been called skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT).9.53 Even prior to the development

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Table 8-4

CELL ADHESION MOLECULES

ADHESION
MOLECULES

CD

FAMILY

DISTRIBUTION

FUNCTION

VLA-l

CD49a

Integrin

Cell-matrix adhesion

VLA-2
VLA-3
VLA-4
VLA-5

CD49b
CD49c
CD49d
CD4ge

Integrin
Integrin
Integrin
Integrin

VLA-6

CD49f

Integrin

LFA-l
MAC-l

CDllalCDl8
CDllb/CD18

Integrin
Integrin

gp150,95

CDllc/CDl8

Integrin

ICAM-l
ICAM-2
ICAM-3

CD54
CD102
CD50

IgG superfamily
IgG superfamily
IgG superfamily

VCAM-l
PECAM-l

CD-106
CD31

IgG superfamily
IgG superfamily

ECs, monocytes, macrophages,
activated TIB cells
ECs, EPs, activated T cells
ECs, EPs
Leukocytes
ECs, EPs, lymphocyte, monocytes, macrophages
ECs, EPs, T lymphocytes,
mast cells
Leukocytes
Monocytes, macrophages,
granulocytes, Langerhans'
cells
Monocytes, macrophages,
granulocytes, Langerhans'
cells
Monocytes, EPs, fibroblasts
ECs, leukocytes
EC, leukocytes, Langerhans'
cells
Activated ECs
ECs, leukocytes

MAdCAM-l
E-selectin

CD62E

IgG superfamily
Selectin

ECs
ECs

P-selectin

CD62P

Selectin

Platelets, ECs

L-selectin

CD62L

Selectin

Leukocytes

Cadherin

EPs

Cadherins

. 549

Cell matrix adhesion
Cell-matrix adhesion
Cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion
Cell-matrix adhesion
Cell-matrix adhesion
Adhesion of leukocytes of ECs
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs

Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs

Cell-cell adhesion
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs
Initiation of EC-EC adhesion,
platelet-monocyte/neutrophilEC adhesion
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs
Adhesion of leukocytes to ECs;
rolling phenomenon
Adhesion of platelets to monocytes and neutrophils; adhesion of leukocytes to ECs;
rolling phenomenon
Leukocyte-EC adhesion; lymphocyte homing
EP-EP adhesion

CD, cluster of differentiation; VLA. very late activation; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule. VCAM-l, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1;
PECAM-I, platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule I; MAdCAM-I. mucosal address in cell adhesion molecule I; PSGL, P-selectin
glycoprotein ligand I; EC, endothelial cell; EP, epithelial cell.

of the SALT concept, it was suggested that the skin functions as a primary immunologic
organ. The term skin immune system (SIS) has also been proposed to describe the
components of the skin, excluding the regional lymph nodes, that constitute SALT.9 In the
following discussions, we attempt to briefly review the specifics of the skin immune system
so that the reader is familiar with the tremendous gains in knowledge and future avenues
for work that will lead to further discoveries .

• SKIN IMMUNE SYSTEM
The SIS contains two major components, the cellular and the humoral. The cellular
component comprises keratinocytes, epidermal dendritic cells (Langerhans' cells), dermal
dendrocytes, lymphocytes, tissue macrophages, mast cells, endothelial cells, and granulocytes (see Chap. 1). The humoral components include immunoglobulins, complement
components, fibrtnolysins, cytokines, eicosanoids, neuropeptides, and antimicrobial peptides. Virtually all inflammatory and some noninflammatory skin diseases involve alterations of, or an interaction between, one or both parts of the SIS. As a result, it becomes
inappropriate to consider immunologic disease as a category if one is to include all skin

550 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
diseases that involve the immune system. Therefore, this chapter presents those diseases
classically described as allergic (hypersensitive), and Chapter 9 deals with the immunemediated skin diseases.
The epidermis is often considered the producer of the effective barrier between the
outside world and the body's inside environment. In this role, the epidermis acts as a
mechanical barrier because it is often the first component of the body exposed to environmental agents such as viruses, bacteria, toxins, insects, arachnids, and allergens. The
epidermis also plays an active role in the body's immunologic response to these external
factors.
Before the immune system can respond to these external factors, however, their
presence has to be recognized. Recognition may occur at one of two levels: on the surface
of the epidermis or in the dermis. If an intact epidermis is present, it would seem most
likely that recognition of an environmental agent occurs in the epidermis. For many
immunologic responses, including helper T-cell induction, antigens must first be processed
for presentation to lymphocytes. Classically, this occurs by macrophages, which express
MHC class II antigens, but other cells with MHC class II antigens may be involved.
Because macrophages are present in the dermis and do not normally reside in the
epidermis, this function is served by another cell, the Langerhans' cell. Even before
Langerhans' cells are reached, external stimuli will likely encounter keratinocytes, which
we now realize do more than act as a physical barrier.
Keratinocytes
Keratinocytes do much more than produce keratin, surface lipids, and intercellular substances (see Chap. I). They are intimately associated with Langerhans' cells and playa
major role in the SIS. It is now clear that keratinocytes produce a wide variety of
cytokines that have important roles in mediating cutaneous immune responses, inflammation, wound healing, and the growth and development of certain neoplasms.v 68 Keratinocytes also produce eicosanoids, prostaglandin (PC) E 2 , and neuropeptides such as propiomelanocortin and a-MSH. Though some of these are proinflammatory, some-such as
prostaglandin E 2 and the neuropeptides-also have anti-inflammatory effects." Keratinocytes, especially when perturbed by exposure to interferon-y (IFN-y), express MHC II
antigens." This expression is required for cells to be antigen-presenting cells for T-cell
responses.
Though keratinocytes are capable of phagocytosis, their role as antigen-processing
cells is unlikely because they do not efficiently process and present surface MHC IIbound peptide antigens and have not been shown to be able to activate naive T cells.
However, they can induce proliferation of allogenic CD4+ T cells. There is evidence that
keratinocytes expressing MHC II surface molecules may induce tolerance. Keratinocytes
may also be stimulated to produce the leukocyte adhesion molecule, ICAM-I.
Besides production of these immunologically important cell-surface markers, keratinocytes have been shown to be very capable producers of a variety of cytokines. They are
the primary epidermal source for cytokines.? Probably the most immunologically important
is interleukin-I (IL-I). Keratinocytes store IL-I, which is readily released after damage
to the cells. In fact, release of IL-I from keratinocytes is essentially a primary event in
skin disease.f" Other cytokines derived from keratinocytes include IL-3, IL-6, IL-7,
IL-8, IL-lO, IL-12, IL-15, IL-16, IL-18, tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a), and a variety
of growth factors and granulocyte-monocyte-macrophage stimulating and activating factors." 44. 47, 50. 68. 80
Depending on what cytokines are produced, keratinocytes may affect the type of
immune response. Keratinocytes produce both IL-12 and IL-IO, which may skew which
type of T cells are activated or downregulate inflammation, depending on what stage T
cells are exposed to them. Keratinocytes may also play a role in tissue repair by production of multiple growth factors. Therefore, it becomes apparent that keratinocytes are
important in stimulating and controlling inflammation and repair of tissue. Considering the
diverse functions, activities, and mediators produced by keratinocytes, it has become

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 551

obvious that the epidermis plays a major role in the immune response and that keratinocytes do not function only as a mechanical barrier to environmental substances.v 68, 85

Langerhans' Cells
Langerhans' cells are interdigitating dendritic cells, which appear as suprabasilar clear cells
on skin sections stained routinely with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (see Chap. 1). They
are members of a family of highly specialized antigen-presenting cells called dendritic
cells." They are localized at the interface between organism and environment, and they
are important sentinels of the immune system. Langerhans' cells are the major antigenpresenting cells of the epidermis and the only epidermal cell capable of activating naive T
cells. They are bone marrow-derived monocyte/macrophage-type cells.
The Langerhans' cell is characteristically identified in the epidermis by the electronmicroscopic presence of Birbeck granules. These granules are often absent in the dog (see
Chap. 1). In the dog, cutaneous dendritic antigen-presenting cells include both epidermal
and dermal Langerhans' cells that express abundant COl molecules. Because COle may
also be expressed on canine monocytes, CDla is considered the best marker for canine
Langerhans' cells. The function of the COl surface receptors has been elucidated.
CD 1 receptors appear to be a third method of antigen presentation that is specialized
and may playa more important role in cutaneous disease. A unique feature of COl
antigen presentation is the ability to present nonpeptide antigens to T cells.i' The epidermal Langerhans' cells do not express CD90 (Thy 1), whereas the dermal Langerhans' cells
do. 52 Langerhans' cells express MHC class II antigens as well as receptors for C3b, FeIgC, and Fc-IgE. The main function of Langerhans' cells is antigen-specific T-cell activation. Antigenic peptides derived from endogenous protein synthesis (e.g., viral antigens,
transplantation antigens, tumor-associated antigens) are generally presented in the context
of MHC class I molecules, which are expressed on the surface of essentially all nucleated
cells and recognized by CD8+ antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. Exogenous antigens (not
synthesized within antigen-presenting cells [e.g., extracellular bacteria, bacterial toxins,
dermatophytes, vaccines, pollens, dust mites]) are presented via CD4+ helper cells that
recognize antigenic peptides bound to MHC class II antigen selectively expressed by
professional antigen-presenting cells (e.g., macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells)." 21, 37, 50, 54, 68
Langerhans' cells bind epidermal antigens and then present the antigens along with
co-stimulatory molecules, the so-called second signal to the lymphoid tissues (regional
lymph node), where helper T-cell lymphocytes in particular are activated. MHC II molecules are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, where they then migrate to the Colgi
and endolysosomal compartments. The processed protein results in antigen peptides that
are incorporated into the MHC II molecules at various points in this migration from
endoplasmic reticulum to the cell surface. At the surface, the antigenic peptide/MHC II
complex is presented to the T-cell receptor on the surface of the T cell, resulting in
antigen-specific T-cell activation. Effective T-cell activation requires co-stimulators and
cytokines that promote clonal expansion of the antigen-specific T cell. The co-stimulator
or second signal is often supplied by the expression of the B7 family of cell surface
molecules. These molecules may be expressed after Langerhans' cells are exposed to
lipopolysaccharide, TNF-a, and IL-IB as well as other Signals. Langerhans' cells produce
cytokines such as IL-l and some lipid mediators that direct the T-cell response.
Langerhans' cells express high levels of E-cadherin (other dendritic cells do not),
which is important in selective adhesion to keratinocytes." Epidermal Langerhans' cells
are thus highly specialized cells expressing molecules that allow them to home to skin and
localize in the epidermis. Tissue injury, microbial infection, and other perturbations of
epidermal homeostasis provide a "danger" signal leading to local production of proinflammatory cytokines, which in tum induce mobilization and migration of Langerhans' cells to
lymphoid tissue.
In humans, quantitative immunohistochemical studies demonstrated differences in
Langerhans' cells in dermatitis due to internal versus external antigen sources.P Evaluation of skin biopsy specimens revealed significantly more Langerhans' cells and spongiosis

552 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
in contact dermatitis (external antigen source) compared with drug reactions (internal
antigen source).

Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes are all derived from a common stem cell in the bone marrow and may be
divided into three main types: B (bursa- or bone marrow-derived) cells, T (thymusdependent) cells, and natural killer (NK) cells.
B cells are characterized by possessing unique surface immunoglobulins, Fe receptors,
CD79 or B-cell receptor complex, and C3b receptors. B cells mature into plasma cells
after recognition of its specific antigen and activation, which produce the immunoglobulins
IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE, and they are responsible for antibody immunity.
The growth and development of B cells occurs in two phases. The first is antigenindependent and yields B cells that express IgM and IgD. These initial antibodies constitute the majority of the primary antibody response to antigens but are low affinity. The
second phase, or memory response, is a response to a specific antigen that, with T cells,
induces differentiation into IgA-, IgG-, and IgE-secreting or memory B cells.P 50, 51. 54 The
second phase requires T-cell activation and is partly controlled by cytokines released by
T cells, with IL-I, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and IL-lO all playing roles in growth or differentiation. IL-4 and IL-13 are particularly important for B cells to switch into IgE-producing
plasma cells, and this effect is enhanced by IL-5, IL-6, and TNF -a,13· 50 IL-4 also induces
the switch to IgG4, and this precedes the switch to IgE.13 In human beings, B lymphocytes are rarely found in normal skin and, even in dermatologic disease, are much less
common than T cells." Considering the relative increase in the frequency of plasma cells
in canine compared with human cutaneous disease, however, the importance of B lymphocytes in the dog may be relatively greater. Humoral immunity is described as providing primary defense against invading bacteria and neutralization activity against circulating
viruses.
NK cells are large granular lymphocytes that do not express antigen-specific receptors
but do have receptors that recognize the self MHC I molecule. When they encounter
nucleated cells with self MHC I molecules, these receptors inhibit killing (killer inhibitory
receptors). Many viral or tumor cells fail to express self MHC I and are killed. NK cells
also have receptors for Fe receptors and may mediate antibody-dependent cytotoxicity.21, ,51
T cells are formed in the thymus, express CD3 or T-cell receptor when mature, and
are divided into two major types: helper and suppressor or cytotoxic T lymphocytes. The
two major types are differentiated by their activity and their T-cell receptors, which is the
part of the T cell that recognizes an antigen. Classically, T cells are considered responsible
for cell-mediated immunity, activation of memory B cells, and stimulation of NK cells.
T cells playa central role in directing and modifYing the immune response. Functions
of T cells include (I) helping B cells make antibody and directing what type of antibody is
made (helper T cells), (2) suppressing B-cell antibody production (suppressor T cells),
(3) directly damaging "target" cells, (4) mediating delayed hypersensitivity reactions,
(5) suppressing delayed hypersensitivity reactions mediated by other T cells, (6) regulating
macrophage function, (7) modulating the inflammatory response with chemokines and
cytokines, (8) inducing graft rejection, and (9) producing graft-versus-host reactions. T-cell
lymphokines may amplify or dampen phagocytic activity, collagen production, vascular
permeability, and coagulation phenomena. T cells can kill microorganisms and other cells,
or they can recruit effector cells to perform this function. T-cell function is known to be
suppressed by numerous infections (staphylococcal pyoderma, demodicosis, blastomycosis,
canine distemper, feline leukemia virus infection, feline immunodeficiency virus infection),
cancers, and drugs. 30. 51. 53. 76
As T cells mature in the thymus, they develop surface receptor molecules. The
receptor molecules expressed on a T cell are critical in determining the future function of
the cell. CD3 represents the T-cell receptor complex and marks all mature T cells. MHC
II -expressing T helper cells express CD4, and MHC I - restricted cytotoxic T cells express CD8. CD28 is considered the major co-stimulator molecule required for the second

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 553

signal from the antigen-presenting cells. CD28 is thought to react with the B7 receptor on
the antigen-presenting cells. We also know that subpopulations of helper and cytotoxic
T cells exist. These subpopulations have different cytokine production profiles. The initial
separation and most studied are the Th1 and Th2 subpopulations of CD4+ T cells; Th2
cells produce IL-4, IL-S, and IL-lO, whereas Th1 cells produce IL-2, IFN-y, and
TNF-a. 9 , 50, 54 However, we now recognize that CD8 and y-8 T cells also have type 1 and
type 2 profiles.s?
The type and diversity of T-cell receptors present on lymphocytes is an area of active
research and one of the most relevant markers of T-cell populations. Terminology one
sees regarding T-cell receptors refers to the structure of the T-cell receptor, which is
usually a heterodimer consisting of two protein chains, most commonly in humans a and
f3 and, less commonly, y and 8. These protein chains are divided into variable, diversity,
joining, and constant regions. With polymerase chain reaction technology, T cells in tissue
are now being studied by their variable region of the T-cell receptor complex, which
represents a small group of antigens. These antigens are most likely representing what is
initiating, or the target of, the inflammation."

Tissue Macrophages
The end stage of the mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) is the tissue macrophage
which, in the dermis, has also been considered the precursor cell to the dermal dendrocyte." 54 In blood, lymph nodes, and other tissues, there are dendritic macrophage type
cells that are also thought to be part of the MPS,24 These cells are all bone marrowderived and pass through the blood circulation as monocytes which, in general, are
CD14+. These cells have a wide variety of activities and morphologic appearances,
especially in inflammation. Tissue macrophages, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells are all MPS cells found in a variety of inflammatory diseases. They serve
the critical function of the afferent arm of the immune system in processing and presenting antigens, especially for T-cell activation, yet are also important in the efferent arm of
the immune response.
The MPS also plays major roles in wound healing, granulopoiesis, erythropoiesis, and
antimicrobial defense (especially against intracellular pathogens). Monocytes and macrophages may secrete numerous enzymes, cytokines, inflammatory mediators, histaminereleasing factors, and inhibitors when stimulated. Some mediators upgrade inflammation,
whereas others inhibit inflammatory activity in order to prevent too much tissue destruction from inflammation.

Mast Cells
Mast cells are derived from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and migrate as
immature unrecognizable cells in the blood and then localize in connective or mucosal
tissues (see Chap. 1). Once present in tissue, they proliferate and differentiate into mature
recognizable mast cells." The regulation of mast cell proliferation and differentiation is
the subject of much research. Cytokines from fibroblasts, stem cell growth factor, T cells,
and IL-3 are particularly important.
Though mast cells were recognized many years ago, their role in preventing disease or
homeostasis was unknown. Mast cells combine characteristics of both innate and acquired
immune responses: They can (1) bind certain bacteria and phagocytose/kill them,
(2) elaborate and secrete several biologically active products, and (3) serve as an antigenpresenting cell and promote clonal expansion of CD4+ helper T cells.35, 48, 63 Their role in
disease has been recognized for many years, and the importance of mast cells in immediate hypersensitivity diseases is well documented. Their role in other skin diseases, however, such as contact dermatitis and bullous pemphigoid, and in the process of fibrosis has
only recently been recognized.P" This relates to the diverse effects and interactions mast
cells have with other cells and structures of the skin (Fig. 8-1).
Mast cells serve as repositories for or synthesizers of numerous inflammatory mediator

SS4 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
INFLAMMATORY CELLS

BLOOD VESSELS

_____::::J
Angiogenesis
Heparin
Histamine
TNF

Fibroblast growth
Histamine
TNF
Tryptase

Matrixdegradation
Chymase
Tryptase

TNF-a, IFN-yand many chemokines (e.g., macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP) l-a),12. 48 Cytokine
production may result in stored cytokines or secretion independent from mediators generated from degranulation.
There are differences in cytokine profiles for the different types of mast cells, further
adding to the heterogeneity of mast cells.P Mast cells, therefore, may play many roles in
the mediation of immune and inflammatory responses. Classically, they are known for the
recruitment of eosinophils and neutrophils, immunoglobulins, and complement from the
circulation and the regulation of the immunologic response (see Tables 8-5 and 8-6). In

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 555
• Table 8-5

PREFORMED MEDIATORS OF HUMAN
MAST CELLS

MEDIATOR

FUNCTION

Histamine

HI and H 2 receptor-mediated effects on smooth muscle, endothelial
cells, and nerve endings
Cleaves C3 and C3a; degrades VIP and CGRP kallikrein-like activity;
activates fibroblasts
Function unclear; cleave neuropeptides, including substance P
Acts in concert with other neutral proteases
Break down complex carbohydrates
Hydrolyses aromatic sulfate esters
Eosinophil chemotaxis and "activation"
Neutrophil chemotaxis and "activation"
Anticoagulant, anticomplementary; modifies activities of other preformed
mediators
Function unknown
See Table 8-2

Tryptase
Chymases
Carboxypeptidase
Acid hydrolases
Arylsulfatase
ECF-A
Neutrophil chemotactic factor
Heparin
Chondroitin sulfate
Cytokines (e.g., TNF-a, IL-4,
IL-3, IL-5, and IL-6)

addition, mast cells can (I) produce IL-12 to drive Th l responses, (2) produce IL-4,
which is essential for the conversion of ThO to Th2 cells, (2) produce IL-5 and IL-IO to
drive Th2 responses, and (4) activate B cells without surface contact.
Mast cells may be divided in rodents morphologically and functionally into type I
(atypical, mucosal) and type II (typical, connective tissue) cells.v 50, 54 Mucosal and connective tissue are misleading terms because both types of mast cells occur in mucosa and
connective tissue. A more precise differentiation of mast cells has been based on the
proteases, tryptase and chymase, present in the cells.63 MC T mast cells contain tryptase
and are the predominant type found in the lung and small intestinal mucosa. MC Te cells
contain tryptase and chymase and are the predominant type in the skin, blood vessels, and
gastrointestinal submucosa. However, because of differences in human and rodent mast
cell proteases, this classification has been largely limited to human mast cells, though dog
mast cells do have chymase and tryptase.P
Mast cell degranulation may be initiated by a variety of substances, including allergens

• Table 8-6

PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIVITIES OF NEWLY
GENERATED MAST CELL MEDIATORS

MEDIATOR

ABBREVIATION

Prostaglandin D 2

Prostaglandin F 2

9-a, 1l-,B-PGF 2

Thromboxane A2
Leukotriene B.
Leukotriene C.

LTC.

Leukotriene D.
Leukotriene E.
Platelet-activating factor

PAF

PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS

Bronchoconstriction; peripheral vasodilation; coronary
and pulmonary vasoconstriction; inhibition of platelet aggregation; neutrophil chemoattraction; augmentation of basophil histamine release
Bronchoconstriction; peripheral vasodilation; coronary
vasoconstriction; inhibition of platelet aggregation
Vasoconstriction; platelet aggregaction; bronchoconstriction
Neutrophil chemotaxis, adherence and degranulation;
augmentation of vascular permeability
Bronchoconstriction; increase in vascular permeability; arteriolar constriction
Bronchoconstriction; increase in vascular permeability
Weak bronchoconstriction; enhancement of bronchial
responsiveness; increase in vascular permeability
Platelet aggregation; chemotaxis and degranulation of
eosinophils and neutrophils; increase in vascular
permeability; bronchoconstriction; engenders hypotension

556 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
cross-linking two surface IgE (or IgGd) molecules, complement components C3a and C5a,
eosinophil major basic protein, some hormones (estrogen, gastrin, somatostatin), substance
P, and a group of cytokines called histamine-releasing factors. 30 , 50, 54 Other exogenous
compounds known to cause mast cell degranulation include anti-IgE, compound 48/80,
opiates, concanavalin A, and calcium ionophores. The different types of mast cells may be
affected differently, depending on the compound that causes degranulation. Variability in
degranulation, the mediators released, quantity, and time course may occur. Another
secretory mechanism for histamine release has been described." It has been called
piecemeal secretion and transfer to the cell surface by microvesicles. There is also variability in the response of different mast cells to inhibition of mast cell degranulation with
the drug cromolyn. Intestinal mast cells were most affected, whereas MC T mast cells from
the lung were mildly affected, and skin MC Te mast cells were not affected."
The heterogeneity of mast cells has been demonstrated in dog skin, though it has not
been studied to the degree of human or rodent mast cells, and further work is warranted. 35, 50 This is an important distinction because many differences are species-specific.
The skin of atopic dogs contains at least two subsets of mast cells that are distinguished in
the following ways: (1) histologically, by metachromatic staining properties in different
fixatives, and (2) functionally, by response to antigen in vivo (see discussion of canine
atopy). Three mast cell subtypes are distinguished in normal canine skin based on their
content of the mast cell-specific proteases, chymase and tryptase: tryptase mast cells,
chymase mast cells, and tryptase/chymase mast cells."
Interestingly, histamine has two types of effects on hypersensitivity reactions, proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory. The proinflammatory effects of histamine are mediated
through histamine 1 (HI) receptors and resultant decreases in intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Also, HI receptors mediate pruritus, and the trauma associated with pruritus may lead to further tissue and keratinocyte damage. The anti-inflammatory effects of histamine (inhibition of the release of inflammatory mediator substances
from mast cells, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocyte-macrophages) are mediated
through H 2 receptors and resultant increases in cAMP. Canine and feline blood vessels
possess both HI and H 2 receptors.P

Endothelial Cells
The vascular endothelium is now known to be a very active cell type that is important in
inflammation, immune responses, and tissue repair (see Chap. 1).18.50.54,71 In response to
various cytokines, endothelial cells express adhesion molecules (integrins, selectins, and
immunoglobulin supergene family [intercellular adhesion molecules]) on their surfaces.
The selectins (E-selectin and P-selectin) are expressed on endothelial cells after certain
inflammatory stimuli and act to slow down and cause rolling of leukocytes along the
vascular endothelium.
The leukocyte activation results in integrin expression and binding to immunoglobulin
supergene family molecules such as ICAM-l and VCAM-l on endothelial cells, resulting
in adhesion. Transendothelial migration occurs after adhesion." Then, in response to
chemokines, the migrating lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes move toward the
site of inflammation. Without this ability to home, the circulating effector cells could not
respond to an immunologic or inflammatory event. In addition, activated endothelial cells
can synthesize and secrete numerous substances such as cytokines (including IL-l, IL-6,
and IL-8), fibronectin, collagen IV, proteoglycans, blood clotting factors, growth factors,
and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Defects in endothelial cell adhesion
molecule expression may result in disorders that mimic immunodeficiencies owing to
defective migration of lymphocytes, monocytes, or granulocytes (see Chap. 4).

Granulocytes
Neutrophils have, as their major roles, the function of phagocytosis and subsequent
destruction and elimination of phagocytized material. In a sense, they are the scavengers

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 557

• Table 8-7

CHEMOATTRACTANTS FOR NEUTROPHILS

Bacterial products
C5a (derived from complement activation; tissue, virus, and bacterial enzymes cleave C5)
C3a
C567
Kallikrein
Denatured protein
Lyrnphokines
Monokines
Neutrophil chemotactic factor (NCF) from mast cells
ECF-A from mast cells

Lipid chemotactic factors (e.g., HETE) from mast cells
Lysosomal proteases
Collagen breakdown products
Fibrin breakdown products
Plasminogen activator
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes (especially LTB 4 )
Immune complexes

of immunologically identified debris. They are considered most important in containing
infection. Owing, however, to their numerous chemoattractants (Table 8-7) and intracellular products (Table 8-8) that may be released at sites of inflammation, neutrophils are
omnipresent participants in most immune and virtually all inflammatory reactions.s" 50. 54, 74
Neutrophil dysfunctions have been described in dogs with pyoderma and generalized
demodicosis (see Chap. 4) but are likely secondary to the skin disease. In addition,
primary (hereditary) neutrophil dysfunctions are described (see Chap. 4).
Eosinophils, effector cells in hypersensitivity reactions, also participate in the downgrading of inflammation and defense of the host against extracellular parasites." 50, 54 They
are also phagocytic (immune complexes, mast cell granules, aggregated immunoglobulins,
and certain bacteria and fungi). Eosinophils have a tremendous ability to communicate
with surrounding cells by the expression of surface receptors and cytokine secretion. Over
60 receptors for a variety of adhesion molecules, immunoglobulin Fe receptors, cytokines,
and lipid mediators have been found on the eosinophil membrane." Eosinophil chemotaxis has been the subject of much research. Currently, a number of molecules are
considered good candidates for eosinophil chemotaxis in vivo. These include plateletactivating factor (PAF), leukotriene (LT)B4, LTD4, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids
(HETEs), and the C-C subfamily of chemokines." The C-C chemokines considered most
potent and selective for eosinophil chemotaxis are eotaxin, regulated upon activation of
normal T cells expressed and presumably secreted (RANTES), monocyte chemoattractant
protein (MCP)-3, and MCP-4. 39 Interestingly, the response of eosinophils from normal
people is less to some chemotaxins than eosinophils from allergic people. This may reflect
priming of eosinophils by some cytokines such as IL-3, IL-5, and granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor." Eosinophils are noteworthy for their preformed mediators
stored within at least two types of eosinophilic granules but, like other inflammatory cells,
they also newly synthesize leukotrienes and a variety of cytokines when activated (Table

• Table 8-8

NEUTROPHIL PRODUCTS
Antimicrobial Enzymes

Hydrolases

Lysozyme
Myeloperoxidase

Cathepsin B
Cathepsin D
N-acetyl-l3-glucosaminidase
l3-glucuronidase
J3-glycerophosphatase

Proteases
Collagenolytic proteinase
Collagenase
Elastase
Cathepsin G
Leukotrienes
Gelatinase

Others
Lactoferrin
Eosinophil chemotactic factor
Leukotrienes
Pyrogen
Prostaglandins
Thromboxanes
Platelet-activating factor

558 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
8-9). Degranulation can occur by three different mechanisms, though it appears that
cytotoxic degranulation occurs commonly in vivo."
Major basic protein (also found in basophils), eosinophil cationic protein, eosinophilderived neurotoxin, and eosinophil peroxidase are potent toxic mediators and all have
been shown to be effective at killing a variety of parasites. Eosinophil proteases may
contribute to host tissue damage and wound healing because the collagenase degrades
type I and III collagen and gelatinase degrades type XVII collagen. Additionally, eosinophil degranulation results in the production of membrane-derived mediators such as
leukotrienes and PAF.
Basophile, major effector cells in some hypersensitivity reactions, may also playa role
in downgrading delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions.P" Basophils are somewhat similar
to mast cells in that they have high-affinity receptors for IgE and contain high levels of
histamine, but they also are the only leukocytes to share features once thought specific for
eosinophils. Basophils contain major basic protein and the Charcot-Leyden crystals (lysophospholipasej.P" Basophils express over 30 surface receptors and have preformed granulestored mediators and newly synthesized mediators after degranulation or activation. Basophils degranulate in four distinct morphologic patterns, none of which is cytotoxic.25
Basophils are important in host defense. This has been most conclusively shown in the
rejection of ticks. In skin diseases, basophils are particularly important in cutaneous
basophil hypersensitivity, a T cell-controlled reaction important in host responses to
various ectoparasites. The late-phase allergic reaction is thought to playa major, if not the
major, role in chronic allergic skin or respiratory disease." Basophils are a key cell
involved in late-phase reactions.'!

Humoral Components
The humoral components as described in the SIS include immunoglobulins (see Chap. 4),
complement components, fibrinolysins, cytokines, eicosanoids, neuropeptides, and antimi-

• Table 8-9

SECRETORY PRODUCTS OF EOSINOPHILS
Granule Proteins
Major basic protein
Eosinophil peroxidase
Eosinophil cationic protein
Eosinophil-derived neurotoxic
,B-glucuronidase
Acid phosphatase
Arylsulfatase
Cytokines'
IL-l
IL-3
lL-4
IL-5
IL-6
IL-S
IL-lO
IL-16
GM-CSF
RANTES
TNF-a
TGF-13
TGF-131
MIP-la

Upid Mediators
Leukotriene B4 (small amount)
Leukotriene C.
Leukotriene C,
5-HETE
5,15- and S,l5--diHETE
5-oxy- 15-hydroxy 6,S,1l,l3,-ETE
Prostaglandins E) and E 2
6-Keto-prostaglandin F)
Thromboxane B2
PAF
Enzymes
Elastase (questionable)
Charcot-Leyden crystal protein
Collagenase
92-kD Gelatinase
Reactive Oxygen Intermediates
Superoxide radical anion
H 202
Hydroxy radicals

"Physiologic significance of these cytokines needs to be confirmed.
HETE, hydrocyeicosatetraenoic acid; ETE, eicosatetraenoic acid; diHETE, dihydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor; TGF, transforming growth factor; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; PAF, platelet activating factor.
From Kita H, Gleich GJ: The eosinophil: Structure and function. In: Kaplan AP (ed): Allergy II. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia,
1997, p. 153.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 559

crobial peptides.? 50 The changes observed in inflammation, however, are mediated by
numerous substances derived from the plasma, from cells of the damaged tissue, and from
infiltrating monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and granulocytes.
The interactions among cells, neurons, expression of cell receptors, cytokines, and
other soluble mediators determine the inflammatory response. Some mediators augment
inflammation, and others suppress it. Some mediators antagonize or destroy other mediators, and others amplify or generate other mediators. All mediators and cells normally act
together harmoniously to maintain homeostasis and to protect the host against infectious
agents and other noxious substances. Many mediators may be preformed and stored with
the effector cells; other mediators are produced only in response to damage or appropriate receptor activation. A complete summary of all inflammatory mediator substances is
beyond the scope of this chapter; the interested reader is referred to the various references.
Complement is a group of plasma and cell membrane proteins that induce and
influence immunologic and inflammatory events.v" 50, 54,76 The critical step in the generation of biological activities from the complement proteins is the cleavage of C3. There are
two pathways for the cleavage of C3. The classic pathway requires the presence of
immunoglobulin and immune complexes. The alternative (properdin) pathway does not
require immunoglobulin and may be directly activated by bacteria, viruses, and some
abnormal cells. There is also a pathway to amplify C3 cleavage, and an effector sequence.
The final effect of this sequence is the production of a membrane attack complex, which
causes cell lysis.
As the effector sequence progresses, a variety of complement components are formed
that have other effects. These other components play a role in neutralization of viruses,
solubilization of immune complexes, and interaction with receptors on other cells. Many
inflammatory cells have receptors for degradation products of C3 and C5. These activated
receptors are important in phagocytosis, immune regulation, and mast cell and basophil
degranulation. Hemolytic complement levels in dogs are reported to be decreased with
enteropathies, hepatopathies, systemic lupus erythematosus, and systemic glucocorticoid
therapy.v" 53, 81 A genetically determined (autosomal recessive) deficiency of C3 has been
reported in Brittany spaniels that experience recurrent bacterial skin and otic infections
and sepsis (see Chap. 4).
Immune complexes are a heterogeneous group of immunoreactants formed by the
noncovalent union of antigen and antibody." 17. 30, 50, 53, 54 Many factors influence the
formation, immunochemistry, biology, and clearance of these reactants. Circulating immune complexes influence both the afferent and efferent limbs of the immune response
and can mediate tissue damage in certain pathologic states. Circulating immune complexes
can be measured by a number of generally unavailable techniques, including CIq-binding,
solid-phase CIg, conglutinin, and Raji cell assays. Circulating immune complexes have
been detected in numerous human dermatoses and probably play an important role in the
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus and vasculitis. Circulating immune complexes have been demonstrated in 6% of a normal dog population, in contrast with 25% of
a population of sick dogs,53 as well as in numerous conditions such as diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, arthropathies, nephropathies, neuropathies, mycotic and parasitic infections, systemic and discoid lupus erythematosus, cutaneous vasculitis, generalized demodicosis, and bacterial pyoderma.l": 53
Lipid mediators (PAF and eicosanoids) are newly synthesized unstored molecules
derived from cell membranes. Cell membranes contain phospholipids, one of which is
phosphatidylcholine, the parent molecule of PAF. Arachidonic acid is stored in cells as an
ester in phospholipids and is the dominant fatty acid attached to the glycerol portion of
PAF. Though arachidonic acid is also present in other phospholipids, this is a major
source in inflammatory cells. After specific receptor stimulation and after cellular injury,
phospholipases cause the degradation of phospholipids. Phospholipase A2 enzymes break
down phosphatidylcholine into a molecule of free arachidonic acid and one of PAF.
Phospholipase C activity also results in free arachidonic acid, but it is the predominance
of phospholipase A that contributes the most to the generation of inflammatory mediators.

560 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Glucocorticoids inhibit the action of phospholipases, possibly by the induction of lipocortin, at pharmacologically achieved levels. This is thought to be a major anti-inflammatory
mechanism of glucocorticoid therapy. I. 9. 23. 50. 54
PAF is not an eicosanoid but a phospholipid that also acts as an inflammatory
mediator. It is produced from a variety of cells although, in humans, neutrophils and
eosinophils produce the largest amounts." 50. 54 PAF primes cells to have augmented
responses to other stimuli and has its greatest effects on eosinophils and monocytes. It is
an extremely potent eosinophil chemoattractant and stimulates their degranulation and
release of leukotrienes. A chemoattractant for mononuclear cells, PAF stimulates their
release of IL-l, IL-4, and TNF-a.
The metabolites of the oxidation of arachidonic acid are called eicosanoids and are
potent biological mediators of a variety of physiologic or pathologic responses. Though
arachidonic acid and the oxidative enzymes to degrade it are found in all human cells,
only mast cells, leukocytes, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, and platelets have enough to
playa major role in allergic diseases. I. 9. 23. 50. 54 Free arachidonic acid is oxidized by one of
three enzyme classes. The two most studied and important are cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase. The third is monooxygenase, and this does result in cis/trans-dienols (HETE)
formation which, in the human epidermis, leads to the formation of 12-HETE:55
The eicosanoids include two main types of molecules, the prostanoids and leukotrienes. Prostanoids (prostaglandins and thromboxanes) are derived by the metabolism of
arachidonic acid by cyclooxygenase. Two forms of cyclooxygenase are known, cyclooxygenase-I in the endoplasmic reticulum and cyclooxygenase-2 in the nuclear envelope, and
they serve different functions and are preferentially important in different tissues. Aspirin
and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs primarily function by blocking cyclooxygenase. Cyclooxygenase metabolism results in PGH 2 formation, which is subsequently metabolized by specific terminal enzymes that result in the formation of PGE 2, PGF 2, PGD 2,
PGI 2 or thromboxane A2. Different cell types have variations in which an enzyme system
is present and, therefore, which metabolites are produced. Each final metabolite has one
or more specific receptors, and new therapeutic agents such as misoprostol are being
developed as agonists or antagonists for these specific receptors. I. 55
Leukotrienes (LTA, LTB, LTC, LTD, and LTE) and their precursors-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HPETEs) and HETEs-are derived by the metabolism of arachidonic acid by the three enzymes of lipoxygenation, 5-, 12-, and 15-lipoxygenase. Different
tissues express variable levels of the cytosolic lipoxygenases. The 5-lipoxygenase pathway
predominates in neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, and mast cells, whereas the 15lipoxygenase pathway predominates in eosinophils and in endothelial and epithelial cells.
The 12-lipoxygenase pathway predominates in platelets. The 5-lipoxygenase pathway results in the production of LTA4 which, depending on the enzymes present in the cells, is
converted to LTB 4 or LTC 4. LTD 4 and LTE 4 are produced from LTC 4.
Typically, eicosanoids have autocrine and paracrine functions that are important locally for host defense, and then they are inactivated or degraded. Abnormalities in production or control mechanisms may occur, however, leading to local or systemic tissue
damage and disease. The actions of eicosanoids are diverse and variable according to the
species, tissue, cellular source, the presence of stereospecific receptors, and the generation
of secondary mediators. I. 50. 55. 73 The understanding of how they function in disease is
further complicated by the complex interactions that occur but that are not included in
many laboratory studies, as well as by the fact that - because of their autocrine and
paracrine functions-they must be measured in the involved tissue. The effects of arachidonic acid formation and some of the activities that eicosanoids may have in skin disease
are summarized in Table 8_10.9.50.54.55

Aging and the Skin Immune System
With advancing age, the immune system of animals and humans undergoes characteristic
changes, usually resulting in decreased immunocompetence, which is called immunosenescenceP: 30. 70 An age-associated decrease in immunoresponsiveness is commonly ac-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 561
• Tahlc 8-10
EICOSANOID

12-HETE
15-HETE
15-HPETE
PGE 2
PGF 2

EFFECTS OF EICOSANOIDS IN SKIN DISEASE
EFFECT

Vascular dilation and increased permeability
Leukocyte chemotaxis and activation; increased endothelial adherence of leukocytes; stimulates keratinocyte proliferation; enhances NK-cell activity; hyperalgesia
Stimulates smooth muscle contraction
Hyperalgesia; inhibits cyclooxygenase; inhibits mixed lymphocyte reaction; stimulates suppressor T cells; inhibits NK-cell activity
Suppresses T-lymphocyte function and Fe receptors
Plasma exudation; hyperalgesia; stimulates cell proliferation; suppresses lymphocyte and
neutrophil function
Vasoconstriction; synergy with histamine and bradykinin on vascular permeability; stimulates cell proliferation
Smooth muscle relaxation
Suppression of leukocyte function; vasodilation and increased permeability

cepted for T lymphocytes but also claimed for B lymphocytes, Langerhans' cells, and
other components of the immune system. Some studies have shown that aging humans
and mice have increased susceptibility to infections or malignancies as well as elevated
titers of autoantibodies, suggestive of higher susceptibility to autoimmune diseases .

• TYPES OF HYPERSENSITIVE REACTIONS
Clinical hypersensitivity disorders were divided on an immunopathologic basis, by Cell and
Coombs, into four types" 30. 42, 76:
Type I: immediate (anaphylactic)
Type II: cytotoxic
Type III: immune complex
Type IV: cell-mediated (delayed)
Subsequently, two other types of hypersensitivity reactions have been described: latephase reactions and cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity. Clearly, these six reactions are
oversimplified because of the complex interrelationships among the effector cells and the
numerous components of the inflammatory response.
In most pathologic events, immunologically initiated responses almost certainly involve
multiple components of the inflammatory process. In reality, many diseases may involve a
combination of reactions, and their separation into distinct pathologic mechanisms rarely
occurs. For example, IgE (classically involved in type I hypersensitivity reactions) and
Langerhans' cells (classically involved in type IV hypersensitivity reactions) may interact in
a previously unrecognized fashion in the development of human and canine atopic dermatitis. Even the classic type IV reaction is not as straightforward as we used to think
because evidence suggests that mast cells, eosinophils, and basophils may playa role.
Realization that this scheme has become a simplistic approach to immunopathology
has provoked other investigators to modify the original scheme of Cell and Coombs, often
to a seemingly hopeless degree of hairsplitting. 53 In this section, we briefly examine the
classic Cell and Coombs' classification of hypersensitivity disorders, because (1) it is still
somewhat applicable to discussions of cutaneous hypersensitivity diseases and (2) it is still
the immunopathologic scheme used by most authors and by major immunologic and
dermatologic texts.
Type I (anaphylactic, immediate) hypersensitiVity reactions are classically described as
those involving genetic predilection, reaginic antibody (lgE) production, and mast cell
degranulation. A genetically programmed person absorbing a complete antigen (e.g., ragweed pollen) responds by producing a unique antibody (reagin, IgE). IgE is homocytotropic and avidly binds membrane receptors on tissue mast cells and blood basophils.

562 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
When the eliciting antigen contacts the specific reaginic antibody, a number of inflammatory mediator substances are released and cause tissue damage. This reaction occurs
within minutes and gradually disappears within an hour. It is important to note that older
terms such as reaginic antibody, homocqtotropic antibody, or skin-sensitizing antibody are
not strictly synonymous with IgE because subclasses of IgG may also mediate type I
hypersensitivity reactions. The classic examples of diseases that involve type I hypersensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are urticaria, angioedema, anaphylaxis, atopy, food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, and some drug eruptions.
Late-phase immediate hypersensitivity reactions have been recognized and studied. g, 30, 50, 54, 73 The onset of these mast cell-dependent reactions occurs 4 to 8 hours after
challenge (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils found histologically). They persist up to
24 hours, in contrast with classic type I reactions, which abate within 60 minutes. The
initial reaction is histologically characterized by an infiltrate of neutrophils and eosinophils,
which changes to a predominance of mononuclear cells. These late-phase reactions can be
reproduced with intradermal injections of leukotrienes, kallikrein, or PAF. Although latephase reactions to the intradermal injection of allergens have been recorded in dogs,73 the
clinical importance of such reactions remains to be defined in dogs and cats. These
reactions, however, are suspected to play a role in flea bite hypersensitivity and canine
atopy.
Type II (cytotoxic) hypersensitivity reactions are characterized by the binding of
antibody (lgG or IgM), with or without complement, to complete antigens on body
tissues. This binding of antibody, with or without complement, results in cytotoxicity or
cytolysis. Examples of type II hypersensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are pemphigus,
pemphigoid, cryoglobulinemia, and some drug eruptions.
Type III (immune complex) hypersensitivity reactions are characterized by the deposition of circulating antigen-antibody complexes (in slight antigen excess) in blood vessel
walls. These immune complexes (usually containing IgG or IgM) then fix complement,
which attracts neutrophils. Proteolytic and hydrolytic enzymes released from the infiltrating neutrophils produce tissue damage. Type I hypersensitivity reactions and histamine
release may be important in the initiation of immune complex deposition. Examples of
type III hypersensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are systemic lupus erythematosus,
leukocytoclastic vasculitis, some drug eruptions, and bacterial hypersensitivity.
Type IV (cell-mediated, delayed) hypersensitivity reactions classically do not involve
antibody-mediated injury. An antigen (classically, an incomplete antigen called a hapten)
interacts with an antigen-presenting cell. In the skin, the antigen-presenting cell is the
Langerhans' cell. The antigen-presenting cell usually internalizes the antigen and digests
it, then presents a peptide fragment bound to MHC class II immune response antigens
on the cell surface. The processed antigen is then presented to T cells, leading to the
production of "sensitized" T lymphocytes. These sensitized T lymphocytes respond to
further antigenic challenge by releasing lymphokines that produce tissue damage. In
mouse models, there is evidence that the development of type IV hypersensitivity may
involve mast cells and, in some situations, small amounts of IgE.50 It has been suggested
that the term cell-mediated is an unfortunate misnomer for this type of immunologic
reaction, which is no more or less cell mediated than antibody-dependent reactions, which
themselves are ultimately due to the participation of a lymphocyte or plasma cell.53 Classic
examples of type IV hypersensitivity reactions in dogs and cats are contact hypersensitivity,
flea bite hypersensitivity, and some drug eruptions.
Cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity may be mediated by T cells or homocytotropic
antibody (lgE or IgG). It is characterized by a marked basophil infiltrate and fibrin
deposition. These reactions occur about 12 hours after intradermal allergen injections and
may peak in intensity from 24 to 72 hours." 50, 54 Cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity is
considered important in the development of immunity to ticks and in the pathogenesis of
flea bite hypersensitivity."
Type I, type II, and type III hypersensitivity reactions together form the "immediate"
hypersensitivity reactions. They are all antibody-mediated; thus, there is only a short delay
(from minutes to a few hours) before their tissue-damaging effects become apparent.
Type IV hypersensitivity is the "delayed" hypersensitivity reaction. It is not antibody

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 563
mediated, and it classically requires 24 to 72 hours before becoming detectable. This
concept has also been further reevaluated so that type III, type IV, cutaneous basophil
hypersensitivity, and late-phase reactions are all regarded as having delayed-in-time manifestations varying from 4 to 48 hours.f"

• THERAPY FOR HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS

Treatment Plans
Most dogs and cats with chronic allergies, particularly those with atopic disease, require a
combination of therapeutic agents for optimal control of symptoms. When possible, the
optimal treatment of all allergies is avoidance of the offending allergen(s). If this is not
possible, most treatments are directed at blocking the effects of the allergic reaction.
Prevention may also occur with immunotherapy (hyposensitization) (see atopic disease)
and, possibly, with some immunomodulatory drugs. When avoidance or immunotherapy is
ineffective, partially effective, or when clients decline it, other medical options are required. Often the optimal control requires different therapeutic protocols over the life of
the animal. Therefore, a treatment plan is required that takes the different problems,
goals of the clients, and types of therapeutic agents into consideration. In general, these
are aimed at treating the byproducts of the allergic reaction that has already occurred.
The majority of therapeutic protocols are used to help alleviate pruritus, the major
symptom of most allergic diseases, to treat specific problems or secondary infections, to
avoid or decrease exposure to offending allergens, and to decrease inflammation. These
therapeutic protocols may be specific for a problem or etiology or nonspecific. The most
commonly recommended therapeutic protocols are listed in Table 8-11. These treatment
options vary in their ease of administration, risks, efficacy, expense, and monitoring
required. In many cases, combinations of treatments may be used and an overall plan to
control those aspects of the problem considered most bothersome by the client is the
most effective way to manage these cases long term.

Avoidance
Avoidance requires the identification of allergens contributing to the hypersensitivity. The
offending allergens may be determined by historoclinical findings, provocation testing, and
allergy testing. Avoidance frequently is effective for hypersensitivities such as flea bite
hypersensitivity, ectoparasite hypersensitivity, and food hypersensitivity but is often ineffective in atopic disease. However, even if the offending allergens cannot be completely
avoided, it is helpful to eliminate exposure as much as possible. Some methods of
avoidance for atopic disease will be covered in that discussion.

Topical Therapy
Topical therapy is often incorporated into treatment plans and is discussed in more detail
in Chapter 3. The major disadvantages are the time and effort needed for administration.

• Table 8-11

THERAPEUTIC REGIMENS

NONSPECIFIC THERAPY

SPECIFIC THERAPY

Soothing topical baths, rinses
Moisturizers
Topical glucocorticoids
Fatty acids
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Antihistamines
Antidepressants
Systemic glucocorticoids

Antibiotics
Ketoconazole
Scabicide
Flea control
Hyposensitization
Hypoallergenic diet
Immunosuppressive therapy

564 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

Expense may also be an important factor. Total body bathing and/or rinses are required
for regional or generalized pruritus and often reduce pruritus by removing surface debris,
microbial byproducts, and allergens that may contribute to the pruritic load. Hydrocortisone (1%) shampoo is not significantly absorbed and may help treat allergic reactions.P"
Treatment with ointments, creams, lotions, and sprays may be possible for localized areas.
Topical glucocorticoids are most effective, but are generally limited to localized hypersensitivity reactions. A 0.01% fluocinolone shampoo was applied to allergic dogs-twice
weekly for 6 months-with no adverse effects. 87a Topical therapy unfortunately is often
overlooked and not presented as an option to clients. Appropriately administered topical
therapy can greatly reduce the need for systemic treatment in many patients.

Fatty Acids
A large number of studies have shown that fatty acids are beneficial in the management of
cases of pruritus in dogs and cats. 94 . 95. 108. 117. 122, 124, 128, 136, 140, 143, 146 In most of these
studies, the pruritus was due to hypersensitivity reactions, most commonly atopic disease,
Fatty acids and their role in normal skin and coat is discussed in Chapter 3. Because
these agents are relatively benign, diets or supplements containing appropriate amounts
and ratios should be used in most allergic dogs and cats.
The proposed mechanism, besides the inhibition of arachidonic acid metabolism,
relates to metabolic byproducts of fatty acid metabolism. Supplements used for pruritus
usually contain one or both of y-linolenic acid (GLA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA).
GLA is found in relatively high concentrations in evening primrose, borage, and black
currant oils. It is elongated to dihomo(D)GLA, which directly competes with arachidonic
acid as a substrate for cyclooxygenase and 15-lipoxygenase. The result of DGLA metabolism is the formation of prostaglandin E 1 and 15-hydroxy-8,11,13-eicosapentaenoic acid,
both of which are thought to have anti-inflammatory effects. 162 An increase in various
immune response parameters was reported in older dogs that were fed a diet rich in
omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids at a ratio of 5: J.38
EPA, which is usually supplied by using cold water marine fish oils, also competes as
a substrate for cyclooxygenase and 5- and 15-lipoxygenase. The metabolism of EPA by the
lipoxygenase enzymes results in the formation of LTB 5 and 15-hydroxyeicosapentaenoic
acid. These two products are thought to inhibit LTB 4 , which is a potent proinflammatory
mediator. This mechanism was reviewed by White.l'" and Figure 3-2 demonstrates the
interactions of GLA, EPA, and arachidonic acid.
The use of fatty acids for atopic disease and chronic pruritus has been extensively
studied. The beneficial effect has been documented in multiple double-blind or placebocontrolled studies. 93 - 95 , 111, 115, 116. 140. 141. 146 In addition, multiple open uncontrolled studies
have been published. In five separate clinical trials in North America, DVM Derm Caps
were effective in 11% to 27% of the allergic dogs treated. 124, 126, 136, 143. 146 In cats, omega-6
and omega-3 fatty acid-containing products have been effective in more than 50% of
allergic patients. 108-110, 128, 137. 147 How well fatty acids work depends on many variables
(dose, omega-6:omega-3 ratio, animal's diet), with 10% to 80% of atopic animals realizing
varying degrees of clinical improvement. The benefit is maximized if other contributing
diseases such as food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, bacterial pyoderma, and
Malassezia dermatitis are controlled. Overall, it is probably safe to inform clients that
about 20% of the dogs, and about 50% of the cats, with allergic pruritus experience
improvement. There is also evidence that higher doses of GLA and EPA enhance the
results. These doses may be 4 to 10 times the manufacturer's recommendations.93 - 95 • 116.
137, 140, 141 Another factor that is important is the type of diet the animal is receiving. Dogs
receiving lower-fat diets may respond better to the supplernents.P?
Although the benefits of these products are clear, which fatty acid, which combination
of fatty acids, what ratio of omega-6 to omega-3, and what dose of these agents are most
effective remain inconclusive. Several studies compared different types of supplements. In
one study evaluating four different supplements, no one product was effective in all cases,
and response could not be predlcted.v" Failure to respond to one product does not

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 565

preclude a favorable response to another product. This study suggested that a single dose
and type or blend of fatty acids that would be effective in all patients does not exist.
Therefore, multiple trials may be best. In the dog, various doses (up to three times the
manufacturer's recommendation) of only omega-6 fatty acids have not been effective in
controlling pruritus.U" 140 With recommended doses of omega-3 fatty acids, canine allergic
pruritus was not controlled.U? However, large doses (up to seven times those usually
given) of omega-3 fatty acids effectively controlled pruritus in 30% to 60% of dogs. 1l6
Whereas twice the manufacturer's dose of an omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acid-containing
product was no more effective than the recommended dose,':" other studies reported that
2 to 10 times the recommended dose may be necessary to control allergic pruritus in
dogs. 93 - 95
Another area that still needs investigation is the importance or effect of combining
the fatty acids with other elements, such as vitamins and minerals (so-called "cofactors").
Some manufacturers and authors-" have claimed that the right combination of cofactors
maximizes the beneficial effects of the fatty acids. No controlled studies to determine this,
and what cofactors are most important, have been presented. In one double-blind study, a
fatty acid product containing cofactors was no more effective than products that did not
contain cofactors.P" Three different fatty acid products were compared in atopic dogs in
one study and no significant differences were noted, though the products differed somewhat in dose and whether omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids predominated.w" Other
formulations claim to improve fatty acid absorption, such as by miscillization. Again,
controlled studies are needed. How long one should try a product has also not been
definitively determined. Although some dogs and cats show a favorable response within 1
to 2 weeks, an adequate therapeutic trial might necessitate 9 to 12 weeks."
Although fatty acids may be solely effective for controlling pruritus and inflammation
in some animals, their roles in synergistic therapy should be considered. Little has been
done to study their synergistic role, but it has been suggested that they should frequently
be tried in combination with other antipruritic agents for managing allergic pruritus.s" A
synergistic effect was documented between fatty acids and antihistamines. 136, 139, 144, 150 A
synergistic effect with glucocorticoids was also described.s" 122, 147, 148
The risks and side effects of fatty acid supplementation are few. The most serious,
although rarely reported, side effect is pancreatitis." This has not been reported with the
diets that have incorporated omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids to appropriate ratios. With
large doses, an increase in weight or diarrhea may occur. With supplements containing
fish oil, some clients have reported an unpleasant odor or increased eructation ("fish
breath").
A beneficial role of fatty acids has been documented, and they play an important role
in managing pruritic dogs and cats. Because of their low potential for risk and their good
potential for benefit, trial therapy with the optimized diets or supplements is often
warranted. Their exact role, indications, and optimal use still need to be elucidated. In
addition, the practitioner is presented with numerous different formulations and products
from which to choose. Until more studies are performed, it is best to use diets with the
proper ratio or products with proven efficacy and develop one's own clinical intuition
about effectiveness and indications.
In addition to fatty acid supplementation, controlling the fatty acids in the diet may
be beneficial. This has been confirmed in a study that used evening primrose oil at four
times the recommended dose (150 rug/kg/day).':" Ten atopic dogs were stabilized on a
commercial canned diet and evening primrose oil supplementation. The dogs were then
divided into two groups that had their diets switched to either Science Diet wid (Hills) or
a leading commercial dry dog food. The dogs consuming wid continued to improve while
the dogs consuming the dry dog foods worsened. Altering the fatty acid ratios and
quantities in pet rations, and not using supplements, may be the most effective and least
expensive method of assessing the efficacy of these agents. Studies showed that an omega-

·See references 94, 95, 108, Ill, 122, 124, 128, 136, 140, 143, 146.

566 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
6:omega-3 ratio of 5-10:1 was the optimum ratio to result in less proinllammatory
cytokines and greater levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines.P" 161 This was then used to
formulate a line of diets that have been evaluated and found to be beneficial in up to 44%
of pruritic dogs.142. 151
In one study,151 commercial dog foods were found to vary so greatly in both their
quantity and ratio of omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids, that achieving the proper antiinflammatory quantity and ratio of these fatty acids with commercial supplements would
be impossible (specific details of quantities and ratios not listed for the majority of diets)
or impractical (such large doses required that it would be economically unfeasible). Thus,
if one really wants to know whether a dog will respond to omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids,
the only "sure" way is to feed a commercial diet that has known beneficial quantities and
ratios (e.g., Eukanuba lamb and rice, Eukanuba f/p). Because fatty acids may have a
synergistic or additive effect with other treatments, they are often recommended as part
of a treatment plan.
Fatty acid supplements have also been reported to be effective in the management of
feline atopy. Although fewer studies have been reported in cats than in dogs, current
information would indicate that 50% to 75% of treated cats have a good response to
products containing omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids. 109. 110. 128 It appears that this response
may be due to the omega-3 fatty acids because a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study
with evening primrose oil (omega-6, GLA) showed no beneficial effect after 12 weeks of
therapy.'!" In addition, it has been reported that cats also benefit from the synergistic
effects of combining fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps Liquid) with either chlorpheniramine
or glucocorticoids. 147. 150 As a result of these good therapeutic results, the possible synergistic effects achievable, and the safety of these products, any cat that will readily ingest a
liquid fatty acid supplement in its daily diet should initially be treated with it. If the
supplement alone fails to control the pruritus adequately, antihistamines or glucocorticoids
can be added.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are classically used to decrease pain and inflammation but have shown little benefit for pruritus or atopic disease. A number of nonsteroidal
drugs have been used to treat canine atopy. Little or no work has been done to document
the effect of some of these, including orgotein (metalloprotein, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory), phenothiazine tranquilizers, barbiturates, and levamisole. 53. 58 Studies of nonsteroidal antipruritic agents in dogs with hypersensitivity skin disease indicated that aspirin
(25 mg/kg orally q8h), vitamin E (400 IV orally qI2h), zinc methionine (Zinpro, 1 tablet/
9.1 kg orally q24h), vitamin C (25 mg/kg orally qI2h), papaverine (150 to 300 mg/dog
qI2h), doxycycline (3 mg/kg qI2h), and the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide
are rarely effective. 53. 88. 146a. 148 So far, lipoxygenase inhibitors have not been shown
efficacious in canine atopy, though they are in human asthma.l'" It was reported that
oxatomide-a mast cell stabilizer-was effective at 15 to 30 mg every 12 hours for
controlling pruritus in allergic cats. 150. 153
Some recently evaluated nonsteroidal agents include pentoxifylline and misoprostol.
Pentoxifylline (Trental) has a variety of effects, and the benefits may result from different
mechanisms, depending on the disease being treated (see Chap. 3). It has been used for
the treatment of contact hypersensitivity and atopic disease in dogs. For canine atopic
disease, the response to pentoxitylline is not dramatic, but the drug does appear to have
some benefit in a percentage of cases and may work best in combination with other
treatments and as a steroid-sparing drug. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study in
atopic dogs did show efficacy, though the condition of none of the dogs was completely
controlled.F" It was effective in dogs with contact hypersensitivity at 10 mg/kg ql2h, but
not q24h. 1l9 Because of cost, it was discontinued in these dogs. Attempts to lower the
dose after a favorable response were not made. Ten mg/kg q8h should be an effective
dose and may possibly be lowered to q12h. 97
Misoprostol acts as a PGE I analog. PGE I inhibits production of IL-l and TNF-a in

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 567

some models of inflammation and inhibits production of LTB 4 by activated neutrophils. Of
particular interest in allergic disease are its effects on decreasing histamine release,
inhibiting eosinophil chemotaxis and survival, and inhibition of cutaneous late-phase allergic reactions.s"- 134 Because late-phase allergic reactions may be involved in the pathogenesis of canine atopic disease, misoprostol might be useful. Misoprostol (Cytotec, Searle) is
available in 100-JLg and 200-JLg tablets. It has been used primarily to treat gastric ulcers
and, in combination protocols, to induce abortions." It was used in an open trial for the
treatment of canine atopic disease.P" In this study of 18 dogs treated with misoprostol at
6 JLglkg q8h, over 50% had greater than 50% reduction of pretreatment pruritus and
lesion scores. However, in none of the dogs was pruritus reduced by more than 75%, and
in only one dog was the lesion score reduced by more than 75%. The drug is sensitive to
water and oxygen and should not be compounded with water or broken open in advance
of use. The greatest risks with misoprostol are for inducing abortions (it should not be
used in pregnant animals) and for causing diarrhea. In humans, life-threatening diarrhea
was caused in patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with misoprostol. In dogs,
33% experienced side effects, most commonly vomiting and diarrhea, but they were mild
enough that the drug was not discontinued.

Antihistamines
Histamine is a potent chemical mediator that has variable actions, depending on what
receptors and tissues are stimulated. The effects of histamine can be blocked in three
ways: by physiologic antagonists, such as epinephrine; by agents that reduce histamine
formation or release from mast cells and basophils, and by histamine receptor antagonists.
We used to think that most antihistamines worked by this latter effect. Now we have
learned that most of the older first-generation antihistamines also function by preventing
mediator release from mast cells and basophils.l'" In veterinary dermatology, the primary
indication for antihistamine therapy is the treatment of pruritus mediated by stimulation
of histamine HI receptors, usually associated with hypersensitivity reactions. 130, 147, 148, 153
First-generation (classic, or traditional) antihistamines are Hi blockers. However, not
all the effects of histamine are antagonized by H I blockers. Because antihistamines are
metabolized by the liver, they should be used with caution in patients with hepatic
disease. In addition, their anticholinergic properties contraindicate their use in patients
with glaucoma, gastrointestinal atony, and urinary retentive states. Some antihistamines are
teratogenic in various laboratory animals. No information on teratogenicity is available for
dogs and cats; however, this issue should be considered before treating pregnant bitches
and queens. Finally, the efficacy of antihistamines is notoriously unpredictable and individualized in a given patient. Part of this variation may be dose-related because antiallergic
effects are concentration dependent and some dose ranges are antiallergic whereas others
may enhance mediator release .104 Thus, the clinician may try several antihistamines and
doses before finding the one that is beneficial for a given patient.
Antihistamines block the physiologic effects of histamine. At least three different types
of histamine receptors have been recognized. The role of H 3 receptors is just being
uncovered, and they are primarily located in the central nervous system, where they affect
a variety of nerve terminals and may affect neurotransmitter release.I?' Their role in
dermatology has yet to be determined. The HI-receptor antagonists are used in small
animal dermatology. This is because Hi receptors are primarily responsible for pruritus,
increased vascular permeability, release of inflammatory mediators, and recruitment of
inflammatory cells. 155
In addition to their histamine-blocking action, some of these agents have sedative,
antinausea, anticholinergic, antiserotoninergic, and local anesthetic effects. As mentioned
previously, most block mediator release if present prior to allergen challenge and if at the
appropriate concentration. Most of the second-generation, or nonsedating, antihistamines
block mediator release to some degree. 155 However, the effects may differ with the
variable or tissue being evaluated (i.e., different results may occur with various sources of
mast cells, basophils, or eosinophils). Variable results may also depend on the method

568 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
used to induce cellular responses, such as immunoglobulin E (IgE)-induced release or
nonantibody inducers, though most also decrease the response to nonimmunologic stimuli. I04. 155 Cetirizine, a second-generation antihistamine, is particularly effective in blocking
the allergen-induced late-phase cutaneous reaction and in decreasing the influx of eosinophils in response to allergens.?"
A number of open uncontrolled or open controlled comparative studies have been
reported.P'- 127. 129. 138. 143. 159 These indicated that the first-generation antihistamines, chlorpheniramine (0.4 mg/kg q8h), diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg q8h), and hydroxyzine (2 mg/
kg q8h), may each be effective in up to 10% of the dogs with allergic pruritus. A doubleblind, placebo-controlled study in 30 dogs revealed that the placebo was totally ineffective,
whereas clemastine fumarate (Tavist) at 0.05 mg/kg q12h was effective in 30% of the
cases.l'" Two other open clinical trials confirmed the effectiveness of clemastine in
dogs. 129. 136 Trimeprazine tartrate (Temaril) at 0.12 mg/kg q12h was effective in only 3%
of dogs with allergic pruritus.F" Cyproheptadine hydrochloride (Periactin) at 0.1 mg/kg
q12h and terfenadine (Seldane) at 5 mg/kg q12h were ineffective in double-blind, placebo-controlled studies. 145. 149 Terfenadine overdose in the dog was associated with vomiting, agitation, weakness, ataxia, and premature ventricular contractions but did respond to
supportive care. 133
Antihistamines may also be used to act synergistically with, or reduce required doses
of, glucocorticotds.P" 147. 148 In one study, the addition of trimeprazine to ongoing, alternate-day prednisone regimens in allergic dogs allowed an average 30% reduction in the
prednisone dosage in 75% of patients.F" Antihistamines can also be used synergistically with other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents that work by different mechanisms. 136. 139. 144. 147, 148. 150 In one open clinical trial, dogs that responded to neither chlorpheniramine nor a fatty acid-containing supplement (DVM Derm Caps) when these were
administered as individual drugs were given the same two drugs in combination.w Approximately 30% of the dogs responded well. This synergistic effect has also been documented with other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. A study compared the response
of pruritic dogs to clemastine, a fatty acid supplement (DVM Derm Caps), or a combination of both.P" Response to the combination was good in 10% of the dogs that did not
respond to the individual agents.
Second-generation (nonsedating) antihistamines are also HI blockers but, because they
are poorly lipid soluble and minimally cross the blood-brain barrier at recommended
doses, they exert much less sedative action and anticholinergic effects than do firstgeneration antihistamines. For some reason, second-generation antihistamines have not
been useful in dogs to date. Terfenadine (Seldane) at 5 mg/kg q12h,135 astemizole (Hismanal) at 0.25 mg/kg q24h,135 and loratadine (Claritin) at 10 mg/kg q24h l53 were all
ineffective in placebo-controlled studies in dogs with allergic pruritus. Terfenadine and
astemizole have been pulled from the United States market because of severe interactions
with some other drugs. In addition to not having any greater efficacy in dogs and cats,
second-generation antihistamines are also more expensive, and some authors do not think
these agents are worth using. 113
Adverse effects vary in incidence and severity with individual patients and individual
drugs. Sedation and anticholinergic effects are the primary side effects from antihistamines. Trembling, increased pruritus, and panting have also been reported. Excitation may
occur in rare cases. Doxepin and chlorpheniramine appear to cause a higher incidence of
side effects. Drowsiness may lessen or resolve with continued therapy. For other side
effects, and when drowsiness persists, the drug should be discontinued. Once the side
effects have resolved, resuming therapy at a lower dose may still effectively control the
pruritus without causing the side effects. Overdosage of hydroxyzine has been reported to
cause ataxia, hyperesthesia, tremors, and hypersalivation." Cardiovascular adverse effects
(tachycardia, arrhythmias, hypertension) are very rare and usually seen only with overdosing. Although the adverse effects of antihistamines in dogs and cats are varied and
numerous, they are rarely severe enough to necessitate stopping treatment.
H 2-receptor blockers appear to have little use in allergic diseases. In a study of 15
dogs with allergic skin disease, cimetidine alone was helpful in only one dog, and no dog

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 569
responded better to the combination of H 2 (cimetidine) and HI (diphenhydramine) blockers than to the HI blocker alone.l'"
Antihistamines are also effective in cats.51, 89, 121, 130, 147, 152, 153 In contrast with dogs,
cats are relatively sensitive to these drugs, and antihistamines other than those described n
this discussion should be used with caution. There seem to be more side effects in cats
than dogs, and care in their use has been recommended. However, two reports have
described using multiple types of antihistamines in cats. One author reported using
multiple antihistamines in cats and indicated that problems were encountered with only
cyproheptadine and hydroxyzine." One study demonstrated an excellent response to chlorpheniramine at 2 mg/cat q12h in 73% of atopic cats. l 25 Many other investigators have also
reported favorable, though not as good, results with chlorpheniramine; therefore, it is
considered the antihistamine of choice in the atopic cat. Cyproheptadine was evaluated in
20 allergic cats and was effective in controlling pruritus in 9 (45%) but produced side
effects in 8 cats. 152
Side effects with cyproheptadine included polyphagia, sedation, vomiting, and vocalization. Results of an open clinical trial indicated that clemastine (0.1 mg/kg q12h) was
effective in 50% of cats with allergic pruritus.P? Similar to dogs, synergistic effects may
occur with other nonsteroidal treatments. Fifty percent of the cats that responded to
neither chlorpheniramine nor DVM Derm Caps liquid, when these were administered
individually, responded well when the two drugs were used in combination. 150 Because of
the effects on eosinophils, cetirizine has been considered as a potential antihistamine to
try in cats, but no published reports are available as to efficacy.
There is marked individual variation in different antihistamines when used to treat
dogs or cats with chronic pruritus or allergic diseases. To maximize the percentage of dogs
and cats that will respond to antihistamines, multiple different drugs should be evaluated.
Antihistamine trials are often run consecutively, evaluating each drug for at least 2 weeks.
Which antihistamines are evaluated in any given pet is a factor of efficacy, cost, and
frequency of treatment administration. The most commonly recommended antihistamines
are those with relatively high (A) and moderate (B) efficacy as indicated in Table 8-12.

Antidepressants
A variety of the psychotropic drugs have been used to treat some hypersensitivity disorders, especially if stress or a psychogenic component may be present. This category of
drugs is discussed in detail in Chapter 15. The drugs that have been evaluated the most
are the heterocyclic (tricyclic) antidepressants (amitriptyline, doxepin) and fluoxetine, another antidepressant that is structurally different from the heterocyclic antidepressants but
that has a similar mechanism of action. Amitriptyline hydrochloride (generic or Elavil) at
1 mg/kg q12h was effective in 16% of the allergic dogs treated.F' Another small pilot
study with the serotonin uptake inhibitor fluoxetine hydrochloride (Prozac) at 1 mg/kg
q24h showed it to be effective in 30% of dogs with allergic pruritus.P' Doxepin was
reported to be ineffective in one placebo-controlled study,135 though in anecdotal reports
it may be effective at 2 mg/kg q12h. Amitriptyline has also been used in the cat with a
wide variation of success reported.f" 121, 153 Some have indicated that amitriptyline is
associated with many side effects in cats, particularly when given twice daily.51 Amitripty-

• Table 8-12

ANTIHISTAMINES FOR DOGS AND CATS

ANTIHISTAMINE

DOG

CAT

Clemastine
Chlorpheniramine
Cyproheptadine
Diphenhydramine
Hydroxyzine

A-O,OS to 0.1 mWkgq12h
A-O.4 mWkgq8h

A-0.57 mg/cat q12h
A-2 rug/cat q12h
A-2 mg/cat q12h

A. Generally effective; B, May be effective.

B-2.2 mWkg q8h
A-2.2 mWkg q8h

B-lO mg/cat q12h

570 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
line was evaluated at 10 mg/cat q24h for recurrent idiopathic cystitis in 15 cats. WI Two of
the 15 cats experienced somnolence that resolved when the dose was decreased to 5 mg/
cat q24h. Nine cats stayed on the drug 12 months: 7 of these had increased body weight
and 8 had decreased coat quality due to decreased grooming, but serum biochemistry and
hematologic abnormalities were not observed.
In general, the potentially more serious side effects of these drugs are induction of
cardiac arrhythmias, such as promotion of heart block by slowing of cardiac conduction,
and anticholinergic effects including dry mouth, urine retention, and reduced tear production. They also lower the seizure threshold and enhance monamine oxidase inhibitor (e.g.,
amitraz) toxicity, in addition to having the metabolic effects and side effects that are
inherent with first-generation antihistamines. Up to 30% of animals treated with these
agents may show vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, hyperexcitability, polydipsia, aggression,
personality changes, and anorexia. An exception is amitriptyline, which rarely produces
side effects in dogs. 127 Electrocardiographic abnormalities were not detected in dogs
treated with amitriptyline or clomipramine.P'"

Systemic Glucocorticoids
Hypersensitivity diseases typically respond well to systemic glucocorticoids, and this is the
treatment of choice for acute hypersensitivity diseases. It is also the treatment for many
recurrent but short-duration (under 4 months/year) disorders. It is only indicated in the
treatment of long-term, perennial hypersensitivity diseases when safer options are not
effective or practical. If long-term therapy is required, short-acting oral glucocorticoids
(prednisone, prednisolone, or methylprednisolone) are preferred (see Chap. 3). Some
human patients with atopic dermatitis cases are resistant to glucocorticoids because of
altered receptor binding. 102
Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy in cats with allergic diseases when avoidance is not posstble.t'" The most common reason they are not used is that owners are
concerned about the risks of glucocorticoids (inappropriately extrapolated from experiences in humans or dogs) and the occasional objectionable side effects. Other contraindications to their use in the cat are concurrent infections (viral, bacterial, fungal), diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, renal failure and, perhaps, pregnancy.l'"
The Simplest glucocorticoid treatment is with repositol methylprednisolone acetate
(Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) given subcutaneously or intramuscularly at 20 mg/
cat or 5 mg/kg. 53• 121. 147 It may be given as needed, but not more frequently than every 8
weeks, and preferably every 12 weeks. Alternatively, or if methylprednisolone acetate is
ineffective, triamcinolone acetonide (Vetalog), 5 mg/cat q8-12wk as needed, may be used.
In cases that do not respond adequately or in which injectable glucocorticoids produce
adverse side effects, or when clients prefer, oral glucocorticoids may be used (see Chap.
3). Most commonly, prednisone or prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg q24h) is given until the
patient is in remission (5 to 10 days), followed by an alternate-day regimen. Some authors
prefer oral prednisolone and use injectable glucocorticoids only as a last resort or in cats
that will not take oral medications." These authors have seen diabetes mellitus occur
following one glucocorticoid injection. One of us (D.W.S.) uses injectable methylprednisolone acetate as his first choice glucocorticoid for the cat and has never seen diabetes
mellitus after a Single injection. Some cats will not take pills well, and liquid glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone, 0.25 mg/cat q12h then tapered to q72h, has been recommended.l'" We have used dexamethasone at 0.2 mg/kg q24h, then tapered, with good
effect even in cats that do not respond to prednisone or prednisolone. In cats that are
particularly difficult to pill, injectable dexamethasone or triamcinolone may be added to
butter, cheese, or chicken/fish broth and given orally.

Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune or Neoral, Novartis) is used for a wide variety of dermatologic
diseases in humans, including atopic dermatitis.t?" 114 There have also been anecdotal
reports of efficacy for atopic dermatitis in dogs. The drug is discussed in more detail in

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 571

Chapters 3 and 9. It has been suggested that a mechanism of action in the treatment of
atopic dermatitis involves the inhibition of mast cell degranulation by affecting the interaction between mast cells and nerves.P" 157
Cyclosporine given orally has been shown effective in a number of humans with
atopic dermatitis.P" 160 It has been less effective when used topically, though a similar
acting topical drug, FK506 in ointment form (Tacrolimus), appears to have some efficacy.
The oral dosage being tried for atopic dogs is 5 to 10 mg/kg daily. After a response is
seen, tapering to as low as 10 mg/kg q48h may be effective. Because this is an expensive
drug, the reduction to the lowest effective levels is usually important, Additionally, the
expense and marginal efficacy usually limit its use to cases of treatment failure with, or
adverse reaction to, standard treatment protocols. Though the use of cyclosporine has not
been described for cats with allergic disease, it should be considered. Side effects in cats
may be serious (nephrotoxicity, gastrointestinal, upper respiratory infectionl'<' but usually
occur at higher doses (10-20 mg/kg/day). Lower doses for atopy (5 mg/kg/day) may be
tolerated better and be less expensive.
Required doses of cyclosporine are greatly reduced by the simultaneous administration of ketoconazole in dogs and cats (see Chap. 3).120a

Other Specific Therapies
Chronic allergic diseases, even in acute phases, predispose to secondary infections with
Malassezia or bacteria, most often Staphylococcus intermedius (see Chaps, 4 and 5),
When present, whether as infection or just overgrowth, they may contribute Significantly
to the pruritus and inflammation. It is important to recognize and treat specifically for
these problems; otherwise, therapies directed at the underlying hypersensitivity or pruritus
will be much less effective, Parasitic diseases, besides causing a hypersensitivity reaction
themselves, may aggravate other allergies by allergic or nonallergic mechanisms (see Chap.
6), These also must be identified and controlled for optimal success with antiallergy
treatment protocols.

• HYPERSENSITIVITY DISORDERS
Urticaria and Angioedema
Urticaria (hives) and angioedema are variably pruritic, edematous skin disorders that are
immunologic or nonimmunologic. They are uncommon in the dog and extremely rare in
the cat. In fact, we have seen only one confirmed case of angioedema in the cat that was
not associated with snake bites or vasculitis,

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Urticaria and angioedema result from mast cell or basophil degranulation, though the mast
cell is considered the major effector cell. They may result from many stimuli, both
immunologic and nonimmunologic.w 50, 53,164, 167 Immunologic mechanisms include type I
and III hypersensitivity reactions. Nonimmunologic factors that may precipitate or intenSifY urticaria and angioedema include physical forces (pressure, sunlight, heat, cold, exercise), psychological stresses, genetic abnormalities, and various drugs and chemicals (aspirin, narcotics, foods, food additives). A case of chronic urticaria and eosinophilic dermatitis
was reported in a dog and attributed to diethylcarbamazine drug reaction.l'" Chronic
idiopathic urticaria in humans may be associated with autoantibodies to the high-affinity
IgE receptor (Fe epsilon RI a).167 Humans with chronic urticaria were more likely to have
exposure to dogs and cats and have positive titers to Toxocara canis. 169 The relationship is
supported by a favorable response of many of these patients to parasiticidal therapy.
Factors reported to have caused urticaria and angioedema in dogs and cats are listed in
Table 8_13. 5.1,61, 163-166

572 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Table 8-13

FACTORS REPORTED TO HAVE CAUSED
URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA IN
DOGS AND CATS

Foods
Drugs (penicillin, ampicillin, tetracycline, vitamin K, propylthiouracil, amitraz, ivermectin, moxidectin, radiocontrast agents, HyLyt'efa shampoo)
Antisera, bacterins, and vaccines (panleukopenia, leptospirosis, distemper-hepatitis, rabies, feline leukemia)
Stinging and biting insects (bee, hornet, mosquito, black fly, spider, ant)
Hairs from processionary caterpillar
Allergenic extracts'
Blood transfusions
Plants (nettle, buttercup)
Intestinal parasites (ascarids, hookworms, tapeworms)
Infections (staphylococcal pyoderma, canine distemper)'
Sunlight'
Excessive heat or cold'
Estrus'
Dermatographism'
Atopy'
Psychogenic factors'
Vasculitis, food allergy-induced'
'Reported in dogs only.

CLINICAL FEATURES
No age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported for urticaria and angioedema in
dogs and cats. Clinical signs may be acute (most common) or chronic. In humans, acute
urticaria and angioedema are empirically defined as episodes lasting less than 6 weeks,
whereas chronic episodes last longer. Urticarial reactions are characterized by localized or
generalized wheals, which mayor may not be pruritic and usually do not exhibit serum
leakage or hemorrhage (Figs. 8-2 and 8-3A). Characteristically, the wheals are evanescent lesions, with each lesion persisting less than 24 hours. Urticarial lesions occasionally
are erythematous or assume bizarre patterns (serpiginous, linear, arciform, annular, papular) and coalesce to cover large areas as plaques (see Fig. 8-3B). Hair may appear raised
in these areas. Angioedematous reactions are characterized by localized or generalized
large, edematous swellings, which mayor may not be pruritic and exhibit serum leakage
or hemorrhage (Fig. 8-4).

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for urticaria includes folliculitis, vasculitis, erythema multiforme,
lymphoreticular neoplasia, and mast cell tumor. Staphylococcal folliculitis often manifests
as slightly raised tufts of hair (tufted papules) and is the most common cause of misdiag-

FIGURE 8-2. Numerous wheals
in a dog with urticaria that occurred following clipping, marking
with ink, and giving intradermal injections of allergens.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 573

FIGURE 8-3. A, Urticaria in
groin following amitraz dip. B, Urticaria with coalescing lesions forming
plaques in a dog with atopy and food
hypersensitivity. Urticarial "attacks"
were associated with ingesting allergenic foods.

FIGURE 8-4. Angioedema due
to phenamidine administration. Note
swollen lips and eyelids. (Courtesy
of D. N. Carlotti.)

574 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
nosed "urticaria" in dogs with short haircoats. Juvenile cellulitis, infectious cellulitis, mast
cell tumor, and lymphoreticular neoplasia are the most common considerations in the
differential diagnosis of angioedema. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and pursuit of the etiologic factors listed in Table 8-13. A specific or
tentative etiologic diagnosis can usually be made in acute cases, but chronic urticaria and
angioedema are extremely frustrating diagnostic challenges, with 75% to 80% of such
cases in human patients defying specific etiologic diagnosis. A thorough hypoallergenic
diet trial should be performed.

Histopathology
Skin biopsy shows a variable, nondiagnostic pattern, from simple vascular dilatation and
edema in the superficial and middle dermis to pure superficial perivascular to interstitial
dermatitis with varying numbers of mononuclear cells, neutrophils, mast cells, and eosinophils (uncommonj.-"- 83. 84 Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is rare. Eosinophilic vasculitis has
been observed in multiple cases that have involved food-induced urticaria.l'v Direct immunofluorescence testing of urticarial lesions in humans usually yields negative results but
occasionally reveals immunoglobulin, complement, or both in blood vessel walls (especially
when the histologic reaction is vasculitis).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for urticarial reactions is favorable because general health is not usually
affected. The prognosis for angioedema varies with severity and location. Angioedematous
reactions involving the nasal passages, pharynx, and larynx may be fatal.
Therapy consists of (1) elimination and avoidance of known etiologic factors and
(2) treatment of symptoms with epinephrine (epinephrine 1: 1000 at 0.1 to 0.5 ml subcutaneously or intramuscularly), glucocorticoids (prednisolone or prednisone at 2 mg/kg,
given orally, intramuscularly, or intravenously), or both. Antihistamines have not been
adequately evaluated for efficacy in treating chronic urticaria. They are ineffective for the
treatment of acute reactions but may be useful for the prevention of future reactions or in
the management of chronic cases. Some cases of chronic urticaria in dogs respond well to
antihistamine therapy, although several agents may have to be tried to find the one that
works best for a given patient. Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg q8-12h) has been helpful if
vasculitis is present.

Canine Atopic Disease
Atopic disease (atopy, allergic inhalant dermatitis) is a genetically programmed disease of
dogs in which the patient becomes sensitized to environmental antigens that in nonatopic
animals create no disease.P" 61, 67., 247 Additionally, atopy has been defined as a reaginic
antibody-mediated disease.P Though allergen-specific IgE has been classically associated
with the disease, more components of the immune system appear to be important. Some
evidence supports the importance of allergen-specific IgG,58. 208. 264, 310-312 The role of
Langerhans' cells, T cells, and eosinophils, as well as changes in the inflammatory milieu
with chronicity, are also being recognized as important components of the disease process.176. 218. 234, 256-259. 267

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Strong breed predilections, familial involvement, and limited breeding trials have demonstrated that canine atopy is genetically programmed." A pilot study failed to demonstrate
any clear-cut relationship between any single dog leukocyte-antigen type and canine atopy,

"See references 30, 61, 67a, 201-203, 277, 281, 306, 314.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 575
but the combination of haplotypes DL-A3 and R15 was found significantly more often in
atopic dogs. 304a The heritability of the development of high-IgE response to antigen
immunization has been documented in a colony of beagle dogs. 202. 203, 314 In Beagles, the
high-IgE response appears to be a dominant trait, but the development of clinical dermatitis occurs in only approximately 40% of the offspring. 202,203 A critical aspect of high-IgE
induction is that immunization with the offending allergen had to occur shortly after birth
and, if delayed until 3 to 4 months age, was ineffective.s'" In humans, the genetics of
allergy appears to be complex, with multiple genetic traits likely being responsible.P'' This
has been supported by work showing genetic differences in mast cell protein production
in human patients with atopic dermatitis as compared with mast cells from patients with
allergic asthma or rhinitis.F"
In addition to genetics, other factors are important in the development of clinical
atopy. One study has shown an association between the month of birth and the incidence
of canine atopy.303 Dogs studied that were born during the onset of pollen seasons more
commonly experienced atopy than control dogs. This finding suggested that dogs may be
particularly susceptible to primary sensitization during the first 4 months of life, which was
supported by the work with the high-IgE beagle mode1.314 Birth during nonpollen seasons
would tend to disfavor the development of sensitization, whereas birth during pollen
seasons would tend to increase the incidence of sensitization. These two features also
suggest that what a dog becomes sensitized to may relate to what allergens are in high
levels at this time.
Parasitic diseases may augment the production of IgE to other environmental allergens. 29 This observation has also been supported in studies in cats. 430 Viral infections, or at
least vaccination with modified live viral vaccines, have been shown to augment production of IgE specific for environmental allergens. 27. 61. 67a, 210. 211 Interestingly, as in Beagle
dogs, most of these dogs do not experience clinical signs while housed in a laboratory
environment (O.L. Frick, personal communication, 1991). Thirty percent of the high-IgE
responder Beagles spontaneously develop IgE to house dust mites, whereas all the colony
dogs, both high- and 10w-IgE responders, develop house dust mite-specific IgG.314 These
findings document that natural exposure to house dust mites was present in all animals
and, therefore, the development of house dust mite-specific IgE is related to other
factors. Even when high-IgE responders with dermatitis were bred to each other, dermatitis only developed in some of the offspring. 314
When Beagles are fed the offending allergen, IgE is not induced, but IgG is.204 The
presence of clinical signs is not always apparent in allergic humans, and disease may be
present at the microscopic level in asymptomatic rhinitis patients.P' We have seen many
cases in which, when secondary infections are controlled, the owners considered their
dogs asymptomatic until educated about signs of pruritus and asked to observe more
closely. This may explain some of the dogs that have allergen-specific IgE but not
significant clinical disease. At least in humans, the amount of allergen exposure and size of
allergen may also contribute to the development of atopy as well as the type of symptoms
manifested.P"
The increase in environmental pollutants and indoor allergens has been postulated as
another reason for the increase in incidence and development of atopic dermatitis in
humans. 176, 212, 275 Considering all these studies, it is interesting to consider the potential
impact of the following situations. Migrating ascarid larvae and intestinal worm infestations
are more common in young dogs with developing immune systems, which is also when
most dogs go through the most rigorous vaccination time in their life. Both factors
occurring in puppies may help explain the high incidence of atopic disease in dogs.
Canine atopy has been classified as a type I hypersensitivity reaction. Genetically
predisposed dogs absorb percutaneously, inhale, and possibly ingest various allergens that
provoke allergen-specific IgE or IgG production. Canine IgE is (1) not precipitated in the
presence of antigen, (2) inactivated at 56°C, (3) not complement fixing, (4) antigenically
similar to human IgE, and (5) capable of passively transferring atopic sensitivities to
normal dogs by Prausnitz-Ktistner (P-K) testing. 30, 58, 61, 67a, 346 It has been traditional to

576 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
espouse the primary importance of allergen-specific IgE, though total IgE level is not
elevated."
The lack of elevated serum total IgE levels in atopic dogs is because normal dogs
have very high total IgE levels as compared with humans because of parasite-induced IgE,
and the relatively minute levels of allergen-specific IgE-though enough to create
disease-are not enough to change total IgE levels. Serum IgE levels are lower in
laboratory dogs that live in confined environments with limited exposures and strict
deworming programs. 214a. 270 IgE levels increase with age up to 4 years.F? Allergen-specific
IgE, as measured by commercial laboratories, may not be elevated in atopic dogs. 195
However, numerous studies show that allergen-specific IgE is associated with atopic
disease.P': 216, 236, 314, 322 Canine IgE also binds to epidermal Langerhans' cells in lesional
atopic skin.256,257
These findings are compelling evidence for the pathogenic role played by allergenspecific IgE in canine atopic disease. However, the absolute requirement for IgE is
questioned because of several observations in human or canine atopies: (1) atopy has been
recognized in patients with agammaglobullnemia'P, (2) allergen-specific IgE cannot even
be detected in many atopic dogs and normal dogs experimentally sensitized to allergens 61, 67a, 310, 311; and (3) abnormally increased serum IgE levels generally do not fluctuate
consistently during exacerbations, remissions, or treatment.P 50, 292 However, allergenspecific IgE may decrease in response to hyposensitization.
It has also been stated that allergen-specific IgG (IgGd subclass) is key.58 Willemse
and associatesv" 311 demonstrated a reaginic antibody, confirmed by passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis (PCA) and P-K testing, in the IgGd subclass. Unfortunately, determining that
the results became negative after IgG absorption, which would have proven that the
reaginic antibody was an IgG, was not done. There also is controversy regarding the role
and specificity of IgGd. 34 , 268, 376 Another study showed that positive intradermal skin test
reactions and detectable IgE and IgGd to Dennatophagoides [arinae, D. pteronyssinus,
and house dust antigen occurred with similar frequency in normal and atopic dogs. 236
However, allergen-specific IgGd was found in normal dogs in greater amounts than
allergen-specific IgE. In addition, a high percentage of atopic dogs had detectable IgGd to
various antigens despite negative intradermal skin test reactions. Allergen-specific IgG also
increased in dogs undergoing hyposensitization.P" Allergen-specific IgE had a higher
specificity and predictive value than allergen-specific IgGd, and the authors concluded that
allergen-specific IgE was a more useful test in canine atopic disease.P"
The subclass profile of allergen-specific IgG antibodies was studied in atopic dogs. 199
The IgG response to house dust mites was dominated by IgG4 antibodies, and the
response to timothy grass was predominantly IgG 1 and IgG4. The data suggested a degree
of IgG subclass restriction in the humoral response of atopic dogs, which may be dependent on the nature of the allergen.
The advent of in vitro tests that measure serum allergen-specific IgE levels has
offered another tool to assess IgE production. In a number of studies, these tests have
shown that normal dogs also produce allergen-specific IgE and that the titers do not
correlate with clinical disease.P" These observations in dogs, and other work in humans,
have shown that heterogeneity of IgE exists, and perhaps only one or some select types
are involved in atopic disease." 29, 50. 182, 216, 236 It is hypothesized that two basic types of
IgE would exist: IgE - and IgE +. Individuals with serum and tissue-bound IgE - would
have minimal or no skin disease, whereas those with IgE+ would have atopic skin disease.
A number of studies in dogs and cats have supported this concept of IgE heterogeneity,
and this offers an explanation for the variation in serum IgE results in atopic and normal
dogs and the frequent lack of correlation between serologic and skin test results.P" 216, 236,
261, 431 Another possibility is that the sensitivity to IgE and the ability of target cells to
de granulate may constitute the underlying abnormality in atopic disease.
The classic description of the pathogenesis of atopy is that IgE (or IgGd) fixes to

'See references 29, 30. 58. 61, 67a, 200, 222, 254, 376.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 577

tissue mast cells, especially in the skin, the primary target organ of canine atopy. When
mast cell-fixed IgE reacts with its specific allergen or allergens, mast cell degranulation
and release or production of many pharmacologically active compounds ensues. This
occurs after intradermal injection of allergen and is the basis of positive reactions. The
role of mast cells is further supported by a study in atopic dogs correlating cutaneous
mast cell density with the pattern of the typical clinical lesions. There are relatively more
mast cells on the pinnae and ventral interdigital skin of the paws than any other
regions yo However, the histology and the clinical appearance of the immediate lesion
(wheal) induced by intradermal allergen presentation does not mimic the clinical disease. 6ia In contrast, the recognition that late-phase reactions to intradermal injections or
patch test reactions produce lesions that clinically, histologically, and immmunophenotypically resemble the spontaneous disease in humans and dogs has led to newer theories
regarding the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (see later).
In humans and dogs, it has been shown that IgE fixes to epidermal Langerhans'
cells. 235, 256, 25i, 26i In atopic humans, this is mediated by the expression of high-affinity IgE
receptors on Langerhans' cells, and aeroallergen-specific IgE enhances the antigenpresenting capabilities of these cells. 23I, 246 In dogs, epidermal eosinophil microaggregates
and increased Langerhans' cells have been found in lesional atopic skin. Even clinically
normal atopic skin has increased numbers of Langerhans' cells.l" 256, 2Si, 26i Dermal increases in eosinophils also occur, though the mean percentage is 3.86% of all dermal
inflammatory cells, which is similar to the findings in a previous study,2.53, 2Si
Similar to what is found in atopic humans, there is also an increase in the endothelial
cell expression of ICAM-l, but not MHC II, in atopic dogs, There are increased numbers
of T cells in lesional skin of atopic dogs, with an increase in the CD4ICD8 T cells ratio,
and increased numbers of lX, f3 T cells (type 2), as in atopic humans. Additionally, lesional
skin from atopic dogs has relatively more CD8+ cells and y, 8 T cells (type I) than
human atopics. 2si, 26i, 286 These observations support the concept of percutaneous allergen
activation of atopic disease and a similar pathogenesis in both dogs and humans. It is
likely that atopic dermatitis is caused by a combination of immediate and late-phase
contact reactions to aeroallergens.2s6-259
In humans, the genetic abnormality in atopic dermatitis appears to be an immunologic
skin dysfunction that has been induced by bone marrow transplantation.I'" Abnormalities
of the SIS in atopic humans include (1) endothelial cells that abnormally express adhesion
molecules, (2) an increase in T cells that are predominantly T helper cells, (3) hyperstimulatory epidermal Langerhans' cells and increased dermal Langerhans' cells, (4) B-cell
overproduction of IgE, (5) IgE on Langerhans' cells, and (6) Langerhans' cells with IgE
that may be able to stimulate T cells locally."
In the atopic patient, this ability could lead to an exaggerated T-Iymphocyte response. Special stains of skin samples from humans with atopic dermatitis have revealed
that lesional skin contains increased numbers of activated helper T cells of the subclass
Th2. 24s, 246 These helper T cells may preferentially induce IgE-producing B cells by
themselves, thus resulting in the production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-1O.9, 54, 245, 246 These
interleukins stimulate mast cell and eosinophil activation and proliferation. Though eosinophils are often not detected in routine lesional skin from human atopic dermatitis patients,
they do play a role in the inflammation, This assessment is based on the presence of
eosinophil major basic and cationic proteins in human atopic lesional skin (confirming that
eosinophils had been present) and the finding of eosinophils in early lesions at atopy patch
test sltes." so, 054, 229
The T-cell subclass is not a constant finding, and recent work has shown that, in
chronic lesions, there is more of a mixture. Thus, early lesions are dominated by Th2
cells, but a switch to both Th l and Th2 occurs in chronic skin lesions. This has also been
observed in the dog, in which a Th2 cytokine profile (IL-4 and IL-5 cytokine gene
transcripts) are more prevalent in atopic dog skin, but a Thl cytokine profile (IFN-y) was

'See references 9, 50, 54, 178, 182, 197,239,245,246.

578 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
found primarily in chronic skin [esions.F" It is obvious that the pathogenesis is much more
complex than genetically programmed alterations in IgE production.
Immediate intradermal test reactions do not mimic the clinical lesions in the atopic
dog and, in many cases, they are not pruritic, suggesting that intradermally deposited
antigen does not reproduce the natural dlsease.F" In humans, similar changes to naturally
occurring lesions can be induced at allergen patch test (the so-called "atopy patch test")
sites in patients with atopic dermatitis, but not in normal patients or patients with rhinitis
or asthma.P: 59. 228 Though these tests are quite specific, their sensitivity is variable. When
results are positive, the changes induced by the patch tests mimic the clinical lesion, the
microscopic findings, and the cellular phenotype that occurs in the natural disease. In
addition, the time course of lesion development shows initial infiltration with IL-4containing T cells, eosinophils, and later IFN-y-containing T cells, similar to the natural
disease in human atopics. 228. 232. 297
These findings are in contrast with the late-phase reactions following intradermal
injection of allergen, with resultant mast cell degranulation and subsequent neutrophilic
infiltrates. These and other observations have led to the conclusion that the mast cell plays
a minor role in atopic dermatitis and that the atopy patch test is a better model to study
atopic disease.>" Additionally, these observations strongly support the role of percutaneous
absorption and the pathogenesis after helper T-cell and eosinophil activation. Only one
patch test study has been published in dogs. 209 Six of 10 normal dogs experienced positive
intradermal skin test reactions to house dust mites, and 1 of 6 "positive" dogs experienced
a positive patch test reaction. Only 1 of 18 atopic dogs experienced a positive patch test
reaction to antigens they were positive to with intradermal testing. These findings were
not very supportive of the percutaneous penetration theory. The predominance of skin
lesions in canine atopy occurring in contact areas would support the importance of
percutaneous penetration of allergen.27. 30. 67. Therefore, the percutaneous absorption of
antigen may better explain the clinical disease, and future studies in dogs may yield a new
understanding of the pathogenesis of canine atopy.
In atopic humans, the water-retaining capacity of even clinically normal skin is significantly decreased, and transepidermal water loss is increased. 173. 205 It has been suggested
that the skin of atopic humans is inherently functionally abnormal." In dogs, preliminary
studies have indicated that the baseline hydration of nonlesional atopic skin is the same as
that in the skin of normal dogs. 193
A summary of current thought as to the possible pathogenesis of atopic skin disease
might go as follows:
Percutaneously absorbed allergens (allergen penetration probably enhanced by inherent defect of epidermal barrier function) encounter allergen-specific IgE on Langerhans'
cells, whereupon the allergens are trapped, processed, and presented to allergen-specific T
lymphocytes. There is a subsequent preferential expansion of allergen-specific Th2 cells,
which produce IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-1O, and IL-13. The imbalance in allergenspecific Th2 cells (with a resultant increase in IL-4-stimulated production of allergenspecific IgE) and allergen-specific Th l cells (with a resultant decrease in INF-y inhibition
of allergen-specific IgE production) culminates in enhanced production of allergen-specific
IgE by B lymphocytes.P 178. 182. 183. 274. 295 With chronicity, changes occur in cytokine
expression with lower levels of IL-13 and increased IFN-y.176. 259. 297
Though percutaneous absorption of allergen is the most likely route of allergen
exposure, the ability of inhaled allergens to induce skin disease should not be overlooked.
In both dogs and humans, inhalation of allergen has been shown to cause exacerbation of
the cutaneous lesions as well as respiratory symptorns.vv 242, 298
An older theory focused on ,B-adrenergic blockade as the underlying abnormality of
atopy.61, 67. Though it is not accepted as the major pathologic abnormality, it may playa
role in the pathogenesis. Szentivanyi proposed the ,B-adrenergic theory of atopic disease in
1968. 53 He suggested that the heightened sensitivity of atopic human beings to various
pharmacologic agents could be due to a blockage of ,B-adrenergic receptors in the tissues.
Since that time, there has been an explosion of investigative effort in the field of the
cyclic nucleotides.v 50, 54, 61. 67. In brief, the cyclic nucleotides cyclic adenosine monophos-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 579

phate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) appear to serve as the
intracellular effectors of a variety of cellular events. They are viewed as exerting opposing
influences in a number of systems.
A number of pharmacologic agents are known to act via various cell receptors to
influence intracellular levels of cAMP and cGMP. In general, substances that elevate
intracellular cAMP levels (l3-adrenergic drugs, prostaglandin E, methylxanthines, histamine, and other mediator substances) or reduce intracellular cGMP levels (anticholinergic
drugs) tend to stabilize the cells (lymphocytes, monocyte-macrophages, neutrophils, mast
cells) and inhibit the release of various inflammatory mediators. On the other hand,
substances that reduce cAMP levels (a-adrenergic drugs) or elevate cGMP levels (cholinergic drugs, ascorbic acid, estrogen, levamisole) tend to labilize the cells and promote the
release of inflammatory mediators. Further studies in the area of cyclic nucleotides and
biological regulation may produce Significant advances in the areas of disease pathomechanism and control of immunologic inflammation.
Studies in a Basenji-Greyhound model of atopy have revealed the following findings:
(1) airway hypersensitivity to methacholine, citric acid, and leukotrienes, (2) elevated blood
histamine and leukotriene levels after antigen challenge, (3) blunted cAMP response to
l3-adrenergic agents, (4) adenylate cyclase activities and l3-adrenergic receptor numbers
and affinities similar to those in normal dogs, and (5) elevated levels of phosphodiesterase. 61, 67a, 184, 191 These studies suggest that the blunted cAMP responses in atopic dogs are
due to increased phosphodiesterase activity rather than to defects in the l3-adrenergic
receptor-adenylate cyclase system.
Katz introduced the concept of allergic breakthrough.I" 61, 67a Normally, according to
this concept, IgE antibody production is maintained at a low magnitude after sensitization
because of the existence of a normal suppressive or "damping" mechanism that exists
specifically to limit the quantity of IgE antibodies produced during any particular response. If anyone of a number of possible perturbations (respiratory viral infections,
endoparasites, hormonal fluctuations) disturbs this damping mechanism so as to diminish
the overall damping capabilities to a sufficiently low level, and if, when the damping
threshold is lowered, the individual becomes exposed to sufficient levels of allergen,
sensitization resulting in allergic breakthrough occurs. This may explain why some atopic
dogs experience a temporary worsening of their disease after their annual vaccinations.
It has been suggested that atopic dogs have a a-6 desaturase deficiency and metabolize fats differently than nonatopic dogs.99, 162 In addition, atopic dogs have lower levels of
plasma triglycerides than normal dogs after being fed com oil, suggesting impaired fat
absorption or increased plasma clearance.s'" The existence of two subsets of atopic dogs
has been proposed."! Atopic dogs were fed an omega-S'omega-fi fatty acid-containing
diet to control their pruritus. Nonresponders had a smaller increase in plasma fatty acids,
suggesting an even more pronounced abnormality in fat absorption/metabolism/clearance.
Both responders and nonresponders appeared to have a a-5 desaturase deficiency,
whereas nonresponders also appeared to have a a-6 desaturase deficiency. The proposed
a-5 desaturase deficiency was also recognized by others,296 It was also reported that the
metabolism of omega-3 fatty acids was differentially regulated among breeds of dogs.38 All
of these considerations could help explain the variable responses of atopic dogs to omega3/0mega-6 fatty acid supplementation.
Atopic dogs are known to be prone to secondary bacterial pyoderma and Malassezia
infections. A variety of abnormalities present in atopic dogs may explain these infections.
Atopic dog comeocytes have greater adherence for S. intermedius,242 and the numbers of
S. intermedius are increased on the skin of symptomatic atopic dogs. 241 However, the
numbers of S. intermedius and comeocyte adhesion appear to be normal in atopic dogs
whose condition is in remission with glucocorticoids. 220 Intradermal injection of histamine
causes increased percutaneous penetration of staphylococcal antigens in normal dogs,
suggesting that the inflamed skin of atopic dogs would also be more accessible to staphylococcal antigens and, perhaps, staphylococcal pyoderma.v'" Cell-mediated immunity is
depressed.v"
A similar situation occurs in human patients with atopic dermatitis. It has been shown

S80 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
that, in dogs, many of these abnormalities are the result of the allergic reaction and not a
primary abnormality.249-2.52 Atopic humans often have exaggerated responses to patch or
intradermal testing with Malassezia antigens, and flares of their dermatitis may respond to
antiyeast therapy.F" A similar phenomenon is likely to occur in atopic dogs and the
presence of an immunologic response has been demonstrated by intradermal testing and
with in vitro tests for Malassezia specific IgE (see Chap. 5).243,254 Atopic dogs had higher
serum levels of Malassezia-specific IgE than nonatopic dogs or dogs with Malassezia
dermatitis without atopic disease, and the level was not related to numbers of organisms
present.P' Malassezia surface counts have been reported to be both higher than or equal
to those in normal dogs (see Chap. 5).
Superantigens are a group of bacterial and viral proteins that are characterized by the
capacity to stimulate large numbers of T cells. 287 They bind directly to MHC class II
molecules on antigen-presenting cells and cross-link the antigen-presenting cell with
T cells expressing certain receptors, leading to polyclonal T-cell activation. When staphylococcal superantigens are applied to intact human skin, dermatitis is produced. Furthermore, in the presence of superantigens, keratinocytes potently activate T-cells. Thus,
superantigens playa role in the induction and exacerbation of inflammatory skin disease.
Bacterial exotoxins also amplify allergen-specific IgE production.P" During exposure
to allergens, IFN-'}' production is decreased, leading to a predominance of Th2-like
cytokines. Bacterial toxins bridge Th2 cells and B cells, inducing B-cell activation. Bacterial toxins also upregulate B7.2 expression on B cells and enhance IgE synthesis. IgE
binds to CD23, allowing nonspecific B cells to become potent antigen-presenting cells via
the co-stimulatory molecule, B7.2. As a result, Th2-like cells may expand and induce more
B cells to switch to IgE production, with subsequent overproduction of IL-4 and allergenspecific IgE. Staphylococcal superantigen-induced inflammation may explain the antibioticinduced reduction in inflammation and pruritus in atopic dogs that have no clinical signs
of infection.
The average serum histamine concentration in atopic dogs was reported to be equal
to that of normal dogs (15.3 ± 7.75 ng/ml)253 or lower (1.46 ng/ml) than that of normal
dogs (3.66 ng/ml).273 The average response of the serum histamine concentration of atopic
dogs to nasal aerosols of antigens that had given positive results on intradermal skin
testing was 0.98 ng/ml (before antigenic exposure) to 2.70 ng/ml (10 to 20 minutes after
exposurel.F" Nasal exposure to antigens that did not give positive reactions on intradermal
skin testing resulted in average values of 0.76 ng/ml prior to exposure and 1.48 ng/ml post
exposure.F" Cutaneous histamine concentrations were always greater in atopic dogs than
in normal dogs but did not correlate with plasma histamine concentrations.P"
Some studies showed increased mast cell "releasibility" of histamine in atopic
dogs,20la. 224. 299 whereas another indicated that cutaneous mast cells from atopic dogs do
not release any more histamine after incubation with atopic serum and anti-IgE than
nonatopic dog mast cells.l'" Total histamine content of skin mast cells is higher in atopic
than in normal dogs. 20la Cutaneous mast cell density, as estimated by toluidine blue
staining, was identical in atopic and normal dogs. 305 Cutaneous mast cell density, as
estimated by subtypes (based on protease content: tryptase and chymase), was lower in
atopic than normal dogs. 305
Leukocyte (basophil) histamine release was found to be Significantly greater in atopic
and artificially hypersensitized dogs than in normal dogs, though the total histamine
content of leukocytes was not statistically Significantly different among the three groupS.227
It was concluded that leukocyte releasibility is a disorder of immunoregulation intrinsic to
the atopic state and unrelated to the concentration of serum or tissue IgE.
Serum IgA levels may be low in atopic dogs. 185. 222 The significance of this is unknown, though the lowering of local immune responses or an increase in antigen absorption and presentation could potentially result. In one study, serum IgA levels were the
same in atopic and normal dogs and skin IgA concentrations were Significantly greater in
atopics. 247a
Canine atopy may be best described as a multifactorial disease in which genetically
predisposed dogs exhibit a combination of cutaneous IgE-mediated immediate and late-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 581

phase reactions to environmental antigens. Immunologic abnormalities, antigenic stimuli,
altered physiologic and pharmacologic reactions, and genetic predisposition all play a role
in the pathogenesis.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Atopy is universally recognized and, in areas with fleas, is the second most common
hypersensitivity skin disorder of dogs, probably affecting around 10% of the canine population.29. 43, 58, 61, 67a. 187. 190. 192. 255. 277. 282. 283, 300, 359a. 402 The true incidence is unknown, and
most estimates are likely low when one considers that many atopic dogs are never
presented to the veterinarian because they have mild symptoms or because they present
for only intermittent otitis externa, which is usually not attributed to atopic disease.P': 248
Certain breeds are known to have a predilection for canine atopy, including Boxers,
Chihuahuas, Gordon setters, Yorkshire terriers, Chinese Shar peis, Cairn terriers, West
Highland white terriers, Scottish terriers, Lhasa apsos, Shih tzus, Wirehaired fox terriers,
Dalmatians, Pugs, Irish setters, Boston terriers, Golden retrievers, English setters, Labrador retrievers, Cocker spaniels, Miniature schnauzers, Belgian Tervurens, Shiba inus, and
Beaucerons." Canine atopy is reportedly more common in females than in males, though
some studies show no sex predilections.
The age of onset of clinical signs in atopic dogs varies from 4 months to 7 years, with
about 70% of the dogs first manifesting clinical signs between 1 and 3 years of age. An
exception to this general rule would be the Akita, Chow Chow, Golden retriever, and
Shar Pei breeds, wherein the signs of atopy may begin as early as 2 months of age.67a. 306
This may partly reflect the environment (allergen load) that the puppies are raised in and
is more common when both parents are atopic. 27. 61, 67a Older dogs may occasionally
experience atopy, especially if they have changed environments.P" Clinical signs may
initially be seasonal or nonseasonal, depending on the allergens involved. About 80% of all
atopic dogs eventually have nonseasonal clinical signs.27, 58, 61, 67a, 282 About 80% of the
atopic dogs initially manifest clinical signs in the period from spring to fall, and about 20%
begin in winter. 61, 67a, 192, 282
The initial lesion is pruritus in areas with either no visible lesion, slightly erythematous macules, or more diffuse erythema (Fig. 8-5A and B). An exception to the rule is
the atopic English bulldog, which often presents with erythema, edema, and other secondary skin lesions but little or no history of pruritus. Though somewhat controversial" the
presence of a primary papular rash should suggest another or coexistent disease. The
exception is very small papules, best observed with a magnifying lens that may be present
in areas of erythroderma or erythematous macules. The skin lesions in atopic dogs are
usually those associated with self-trauma, secondary bacterial pyoderma, secondary Malassezia dermatitis, and secondary seborrheic skin disease.F" 34, 61, 67a, 282
The self-trauma, chronic inflammation, and secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis may result in complete or partial alopecia, salivary staining, papules, pustules, circular crusted papules, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification (see Figs. 8-5C and
D). In general, the presence of lichenifled, crusty, or greasy plaques is associated with
secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis (see Fig. 8-5E). Pruritus usually
involves the face (see Fig. 8-5A and C), paws (see Fig. 8-5B and D), distal extremities,
anterior elbows (see Fig. 8-5F), and ventrum, or some combination thereof (see Figure
8-5G).
One study suggested that the pattern of disease in house dust mite-hypersensitive
dogs was more a ventral contact pattern and that the pattern of all skin disease overall
had no absolute association with the diagnosis of flea bite hypersensitivity or atopy from
pollens or house dust mites.P" This study also reported dorsal lumbar involvement in 39%
of the atopic dogs. Generalized cutaneous involvement may eventually be present in about
40% of these dogs. 67a, 277, 402 Atopic otitis externa (see Fig. 8-5H) and conjunctivitis may

'See references 187, 192, 201, 255, 282, 283, 306, 359a.

FIGURE 8-5. See legend on opposite page

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 583

be present in about 40% to 80% of these dogs." Secondary bacterial pyoderma (folliculitis,
furunculosis), pyotraumatic dermatitis, or acral lick dermatitis may be present in as many
as 68% of atopic dogs. t Marked seborrhea occurs in 12% of atopic dogsP· 67a. 282 Close
inspection, however, reveals that most atopic dogs have mild scaling in most pruritic areas.
The haircoat is often dryer in these areas as well, though in some dog breeds (especially
German shepherd, Chinese Shar Pei, Lhasa apso, Shih tzu) it may be greasy.27 Hyperhidrosis may be present in 10% to 20% of atopic dogs.61, 67a, 282
Seborrheic skin disease, hyperhidrosis, secondary bacterial infections, and secondary
Malassezia infections may complicate canine atopy, and there is a predisposition for atopic
dogs to have an increased number of Malassezia organisms on their skin.307 This is
particularly apparent in skin scrapings from the interdigital area. The Malassezia contributes to the objectionable odor of atopic dogs and more commonly involves the ears, paws,
claw folds, and ventral neck (Fig. 8-6). Brown staining of the claws at the claw fold is
suggestive of Malassezia paronychia.s'" The yeast may also contribute as an allergen,
exacerbating the atopic disease and pruritus directly, even without obvious yeast overgrowth. 243. 254 In one study, 27.7% of atopic dogs had anal sacculttis.l'"
Some atopic dogs experience a seasonally recurrent pruritic bacterial folliculitis or
furunculosis. Antibiotic therapy resolves the skin lesions and the pruritus. Whether these
atopic dogs are truly nonpruritic and asymptomatic without their infections, or whether
their owners tolerate or ignore low levels of licking, chewing, and scratching (perhaps
believing them to be normal for their dogs), is unclear. In any case, these dogs are skin
test-positive, and successful hyposensitization or anti-inflammatory drug therapy prevents
recurrence of the bacterial skin disease.
Noncutaneous clinical signs reported to occur occasionally in atopic dogs include
rhinitis, asthma, cataracts, urinary and gastrointestinal disorders, and hormonal hypersensitivity.27, 58, 67a, 282 We have also seen cases with reverse sneezing that resolves with a
favorable response to hyposensitization. Atopic female dogs may exhibit irregular estrus
cycles, low conception rates, and high incidence of pseudopregnancy.61, 67a It has not been
determined what proportion of the secondary infections, seborrhea, and noncutaneous
signs are induced or influenced by previous therapies used.
DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis is lengthy, considering the wide variation of presenting signs and
secondary complications that may occur-for example, pruritic facial dermatitis, pruritic
pododermatitis, pruritic otitis extema, pruritic ventral dermatitis, pruritic generalized dermatitis, seborrhea, recurrent superficial bacterial pyoderma, and Malassezia dermatitis.
The more common considerations in the differential diagnosis, however, are (1) flea bite
hypersensitivity, (2) food hypersensitivity, (3) scabies, (4) insect hypersensitivity, (5) contact dermatitis (primary irritant or hypersensitivity), (6) intestinal parasite hypersensitivity,
(7) bacterial folliculitis, and (8) Malassezia dermatitis. In dogs under 12 months of age,
endoparasitic hypersensitivity, insect hypersensitivity, scabies, and food hypersensitivity are
the major possibilities to pursue. In our experience, and that of most of the veterinary
literature, flea bite hypersensitivity only rarely causes facial dermatitis, conjunctivitis, or

"See references 7, 61, 67a, 192, 248, 277, 282, 402.
'See references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 277, 282, 283.

FIGURE 8-5. Canine atopy. A, Mild erythroderma of the muzzle, an early lesion of atopic disease in a commonly
affected site. B, Erythematous macules, and mild digital alopecia interdigitally. C, Periocular alopecia and hyperpigmentation from chronic rubbing of the eyes. D, Paw licking results in rust-colored digital hairs. E, Secondary bacterial pyoderma
or Malassezia dermatitis is usually present in these ventral thoracic and abdominal lichenified lesions. F, Licking of the
anterior elbows is a common site of pruritus in atopic dogs. G, Classic presentation of face, axillae, and paws. H, Pinnal
erythema with secondary accumulations of excessive cerumen.

584 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-6. Ventral neck lesions with Malassezia dermatitis in an atopic dog.

otitis externa, but many atopic dogs (as many as 75%) have concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity.P" 61. 67a. 186 Therefore, when these other cutaneous reaction patterns are present in
a flea-hypersensitive dog, atopy may also be present and is most rapidly ruled out by
intradermal skin testing. In addition, atopic dogs may have concurrent food hypersensitivity.61. 67a, 186. 517. 518
The diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, ruling out other possible
diagnoses, and intradermal testing. 34 , 61, 67a. 268. 376 It cannot be overemphasized that allergy
tests are never a substitute for a meticulously gathered history, a thorough physical
examination, and a careful and complete elimination of other diagnoses and concurrent
problems. Owing to the generally low specificity of commercial in vitro tests, they should
not be used for diagnosis of atopic disease.P" 67a Peripheral and tissue eosinophilias are
rare in atopic dogs unless the dogs have concurrent ectoparasitisms, insect hypersensitivities, or endoparasitisms.s'<F"
A tentative diagnosis of canine atopy can be based on history, clinical signs, and
laboratory tests to rule out other possibilities. A definitive diagnosis of atopy and revelation of the allergens involved may be made with intradermal (skin) testing and, to some
extent, in vitro (serologic) allergy tests. The intradermal test is thought to be superior to
the scratch, prick, and in vitro allergy tests. 58, 61, 67a Because of the very common occurrence of "false-positive" (clinically insignificant) reactions obtained, in vitro allergy testing
should not be used alone to diagnose atopy, but it may be helpful in determining which
allergens to include in a hyposensitization formula.
Intradermal Allergy Testing

A limited number of studies have been conducted to document optimal intradermal
testing procedures. Unfortunately, different commercial allergen sources were sometimes

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 585

used, making comparisons impossible, and the studies have not directly compared different commercial sources of allergens. Whichever company is used should be consulted for
information regarding their testing concentrations. Multiple studies have been conducted
with a variety of different commercial allergens, and differences do OCCUr. 51, 57a, 324, 375, 393
Even with the same allergen source, some results have differed.P" 51, 216,330,332 It is likely
that some differences among studies with the same allergens reflect the animals' exposure to significant allergen levels that may induce positive but clinically insignificant reactions.i" 51, 215, 332 This is supported by the observation in humans of patients with known
allergy having no symptoms but still having histologic evidence of disease.l'"
Preferably the allergen companies should have results of independent studies because
differences may occur. Studies with aqueous allergens made by Greer Laboratories have
shown that, for most allergens, 0.05 ml of 1000 protein nitrogen units (PNU) per ml is
not reactive in most normal dogs and cats. Exceptions are mold mix 2, which probably
should not be used, and house dust. When house dust antigen was used at a strength of
greater than or equal to 250 PNUlml, approximately 50% of atopic and normal dogs
experienced positive intradermal reacttons.v? 330 If house dust is used, it should be used
at 125 PNU/ml or less. House dust mite is currently preferred by many authors.v- 58, 61, 67a
House dust is a heterogenous mixture of animal and human danders, molds, house dust
mites, insect debris, bacteria, food particles, breakdown products of clothing, and inorganic substances, and each lot can vary in its antigenicity and irritability.390, 391
House dust mites are thought to be the major allergenic component. House dust has
been used for years to test and hyposensitize dogs and cats.s- 67a One study showed that
the reactivities of house dust and house dust mite allergens in atopic dogs were very
comparable.P" This same study indicated that there was a strong positive correlation
between reactions to house dust mite and Rea antigen but not between house dust and
kapok or mixed feathers. Other allergens that have given controversial results are cattle
hair, wool, feathers, tobacco, and cat dander as causes of false-positive (irritant) skin test
reactions.F: 58, 61, 67a Cattle hair, wool, feathers, and mold mixes should be used at 250
to 500 PNU/ml. In general, the recommended aqueous test allergen concentration is
1000 PNUlml or 1: 1000 weight/volume (w/v) .
• Allergen Selection. Skin test allergen selection is an important subject. Consultations with allergen firms and national pollen charts reviewing prevalence of pollens in the
practice area help the clinician decide what to test for. A good veterinary reference is the
book by Reedy and colleagues, Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats, 2nd edition. It is
important to select allergens from a reputable allergen supply house and then not to
switch because experience with one source becomes important. Tremendous unresolved
problems surround the standardization of allergenic extracts, including standards for raw
material collection, methods of measuring the purity of raw materials, techniques for
identifYing many substances, a variety of methods of manufacturing, and determination of
allergen stability and potency.27. 30, 50, 58, 51, 57a Bioactivity of commercial products varies
from lO-fold to 1000-fold, and no relationship was found between bioactivity and concentrations declared in PNU or W/V,58, 61, 67a
Testing with allergen mixes is not recommended.F: 58. 61, 57a, 375 Such mixes frequently
result in false-negative reactions because individual allergens within the mix may be in a
concentration too dilute for detection. More important, the patient may be allergic to only
one of the allergens within the mix, making hyposensitization based on the mix result less
specific. In fact, one most likely ends up hyposensitizing with allergens that the pet is not
allergic to and, potentially, inducing new allergies. One report, however, has indicated that
treating normal dogs with irrelevant antigens administered according to a common hyposensitization protocol induced neither skin test positivity nor clinical signs of allergy.329
Skin testing with commercial "regional" allergen kits that use mixes is unsatisfactory.
Instead, discussions with the supply house regarding the most important allergens for the
practice area may be the most appropriate way to perform cost-effective and accurate
tests for the client's budget.
Allergens commonly reported to be important in dogs are house dust mites, house

586 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

dust, human dander, feathers, kapok, molds, weeds, grasses, and trees." In the United
States, most animals are multisensitive.v- 67., 279, 282 Polysensitization was originally reported
to be rare in Europe.P- 374 In fact, it was reported that European dogs were often
sensitive only to house dust mites and, even when other allergens had given positive
reactions, hyposensitization was frequently undertaken using only house dust mites and reevaluated in 1 year,58, 374 Recent publications, however, indicate that multisensitivity is the
rule in some European countries, 192, 277, 386 The most important allergens in Europe are
reported to be house dust, house dust mite, and human dander. t House dust mite is also
the most important allergen in the United States and Japan,61, 67., 359.
The two species of house dust mites commonly tested are D. farinae and D. pteronyssinus. Though both of these mites are members of the family Pyroglyphidae, they each
have multiple allergenic epitopes for humans. In humans, there are two main groups of
allergens that may have partial cross-reactivity between different species for allergens
within the same group. In dogs, it has also been shown that Dermatophagoides mites
cross-react with the mite Blomia tropicalis. 325 Studies have shown that dogs and humans
recognize different major allergens from Dermatophagoides mites and that these antigens
are not cross-reactive.P'- 337, 368, 369 However, the results of one in vitro study in atopic
dogs in Japan indicated strong cross-reactivity between D. farinae and D. pteronyssinus. 359b
In contrast, another study indicated that 69% of D. farinae-positive dogs had detectable serum IgE to a 30-kD protein thought to be Der F J.361 This is an important
distinction because the trend in human medicine is to test for these specific allergenic
epitopes. It would not be appropriate to extrapolate and use these specific tests in dogs
unless the importance of that allergenic epitope is documented in the dog. Dogs react
much more commonly to D. farinae than to D. pteronyssinus but not to the major
allergens (Der F I and Der F II; Der P I and Der P II) recognized by humans. 368, 369 Of
the house dust mite-hypersensitive dogs, 90% are found to react to a protein of 80 to
90 kD.336, 337, 368, 369
Another house dust mite major allergen has been detected in the dog.361 It is a
109-kD protein chitinase. Another potential complicating factor when comparing studies
on house dust mite studies is the variation in commercial extracts. This was shown in a
study in dogs based on antigen-specific IgG tests. 385 Different commercial extracts varied
in the number of protein bands detected. Comparing extracts from three companies also
showed slightly different results in a group of normal laboratory reared dogs that would,
theoretically, have very limited exposure to house dust mite allergen. 332
Other mites are also important contributors to the arachnid levels in house dust. The
mite Euroglyphus maynei has been found in numerous countries and, in England, has
been reported to be the predominant species of mites in many homes. Though it is often
found living with the Dermatophagoides spp. and it is a member of the same family, it
does have multiple distinct allergens recognized by humans. No studies have been reported in the dog. The mite Blomia tropicalis is a glyciphagid house dust mite that is
found in tropical and subtropical climates. It was found in 44% of examined houses in San
Diego and, in Brazil, was found as the dominant house dust mite species. Several studies
have shown some cross-reactivity with the Dermatophagoides spp. mites, but multiple
species-specific allergens are also found. It is possible that these other house dust mites,
which can be present in high numbers, may be important allergens in atopic dogs in
certain regions. One study showed that dogs reacted to B. tropicalis in a country where
this mite is not found and showed that at least some of this is due to cross-reactivity to
Dermatophagoides Spp.325
Storage mites may also playa role in atopy or act as a separate disease (see Storage
Mite Dermatitis). In addition, other insect antigens (see Insect Hypersensitivity) have
been reported to cause positive reactions in many atopic dogs as well as in atopic suspects
that were skin test negative to all other commonly tested allergens.F" 192, 392, 593, 594 Cock-

"See references 27, 34, 58, 61, 67a, 186, 192, 277, 279, 282, 337, 354, 370, 383.
tSee references 58, 186, 192, 255, 277, 354, 386.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 587
• Table 8-14

REASONS FOR FALSE·NEGATIVE INTRADERMAL
SKIN TEST REACTIONS

Subcutaneous injections
Too little allergen:
Testing with mixes
Outdated allergens
Allergens too dilute (1000 PNUlml recommended)
Too small volume of allergen injected
Drug interference:
Glucocorticoids
Antihistamines
Tranquilizers
Progestational compounds
Any drugs that lower blood pressure significantly
Anergy (testing during peak of hypersensitivity reaction)
Inherent host factors
Estrus, pseudopregnancy
Severe stress (systemic diseases, fright, struggling)
Endoparasitism or ectoparasitism? ("blocking" of mast cells with antiparasitic IgE?)
Off-season testing (testing more than 1 to 2 months after clinical signs have disappeared)
Histamine "hyporeactivity"

roaches (Blatella germanica, B. orientalis, Suppela suppellectillium, Periplaneta americana)
have been shown to be important allergens in humans and to cross-react with house dust,
possibly because of cockroach particles present in house dust.F" Twenty-five atopic dogs
were skin tested with cockroach antigen, and results were positive in four, though these
same four also yielded positive results to house dust mites.F" One case of canine atopy
was related to marijuana exposure.F" Some dogs are reactive only to molds.277.408
It is essential to remember that a positive skin test reaction means only that the
patient has skin-sensitizing antibody, mast cells that degranulate on antigen exposure, and
target tissue that responds to the released mediators. A positive reaction does not necessarily mean that the patient has clinical allergy to the allergen(s) injected. Thus, it is
essential that positive skin test reactions be interpreted in light of the patient's history. By
the same token, a negative skin test reaction does not necessarily mean that the patient is
not atopic. Ten percent to 30% of the otherwise classically atopic dogs may have negative
skin test reactions.F" 58. 61. 67a This group probably reflects either failure (by limiting the
number of test allergens used) to challenge dogs with the appropriate allergens or the
intervention of various factors known to produce false-negative reactions, as listed in Table
8-14.
Many factors may lead to false-positive or false-negative skin test reactions in dogs
(see Table 8-14; Table 8_15).34.58.61. 67a These factors must be carefully considered when
skin testing is performed. False-positive reactions to house dust mite have been reported
in up to 60% of dogs with scabiesF< 374, 375 The most common cause of negative skin test

• Table 8-15

REASONS FOR FALSE·POSITIVE INTRADERMAL
SKIN TEST REACTIONS

Irritant test allergens (especially those containing glycerin; also some house dust, feather, wool, mold, and all
food preparations)
Contaminated test allergens (bacteria, fungi)
Skin-sensitizing antibody only (prior clinical or present subclinical sensitivity)'
Poor technique (traumatic placement of needle; dull or burred needle; too large a volume injected; air injected)
Substances that cause nonimmunologic histamine release (narcotics)
"Irritable" skin (large reactions seen to all injected substances, including saline control)
Dermatographism
Mitogenic allergen
'These reactions would be more appropriately called "clinically insignificant."

588 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

reactions is the recent administration of certain drugs: glucocorticoids, antihistamines,
progestagens. Ketoconazole does not interfere with intradermal test results.P" There are
no reliable withdrawal times for these drugs. Guidelines have been arbitrarily determined
by clinicians, with rare studies conducted to confirm them. One study that evaluated
hydroxyzine inhibition of intradermal test results for flea allergen demonstrated suppression up to 10 days.32o Even this study has to be interpreted carefully because some
authorities think that different allergens may be more easily suppressed and that flea
antigen in particular is less inhibited by drugs. 565
General rules of thumb for drug withdrawal times prior to skin testing are: 3 weeks
for oral and topical glucocorticoids, 8 weeks for injectable glucocorticoids, 10 days for
antihistamines, and 10 days for products and diets containing omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids.
Cutaneous reactivity to histamine was not Significantly reduced in normal or pruritic dogs
treated topically with a 1% hydrocortisone conditioner.P" If the dog has any cutaneous
signs of iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome, such as atrophy, striae, loss of elasticity, or peeling
and scaling, it is preferable to wait until these signs are improved prior to testing.
Allergens must also be stored properly in glass and not allowed to freeze repetitively.30.352
Although it has been reported that the biological activity of allergens stored in plastic
syringes decreased faster than those stored in glass syringes,325. 349. 379 no significant differences occurred in skin test reactivity.F?
Studies of intradermal test reactions in normal dogs have generally yielded the following findings: (1) no breed differences, (2) either no age differences or decreased reactivity
with increasing age, (3) either no sex differences or increased reactivity of females to
some allergens, (4) decreased reactivity to some allergens with increasing haircoat pigmentation, (5) decreased reactivity to histamine in hospitalized dogs compared with normal
household dogs (stress related?), (6) weekly intradermal injections of allergens resulting in
multiple positive reactions to allergens that Originally tested negative (usually after weekly
injections for 8 weeks), and (7) previous treatment with allergens not inducing positive
reactions.": 67•. 318. 319, 329, 382 Although many commercial skin test antigens contain measurable amounts of histamine, the quantity is not sufficient to cause false-positive skin test
reactions.F"
Clearly, intradermal testing is not a procedure to be taken lightly, It requires keen
attention to details and possible pitfalls, together with experience and lots of practice,
Intradermal testing, however, is the preferred method of diagnosing canine atopy.
Whereas clinically insignificant positive reactions in normal dogs are very common with
serologic testing, they occur in only 10% to 15% of normal dogs with intradermal testing. 57a, 383, 384 Clinicians who cannot conduct skin tests On dogs On a weekly or biweekly
basis will probably be unhappy with the results. In experienced hands, however, the
intradermal test is a powerful tool in the diagnosis and management of canine atopy.
When possible, cases should be referred to clinicians who specialize in this subject. When
this is not possible, the use of serum in vitro tests is appropriate as long as atopic disease
has been clinically diagnosed and the test results are carefully interpreted. These data are
then used to select allergens for hyposensitization, with success rates being similar to
those achieved with intradermal testing (see later).
• Procedure for Intradermal Allergy Testing. A commonly used procedure for
intradermal testing is as follows:
0

1. Make sure the patient at least reacts to histamine. One-twentieth (0.05) ml of

1: 100,000 histamine phosphate is injected intradermally. A wheal 10 to 20 mm in
diameter should be present at 15 to 30 minutes after injection. If the histamine
wheal is small (less than 10 mm) to absent, postpone intradermal skin testing and
test the animal with histamine weekly until the expected reaction is seen. A

positive reaction does not invariably indicate that testing will be unaffected by

'See references 27. 61, 67a, 190, 195, 265, 331, 339, 363, 376.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 589
previous drugs. Rarely, cutaneous reactivity to histamine returns prior to cutaneous
reactivity to allergen.
2. Chemical restraint is helpful and may decrease the endogenous release of glucocorticoids. One study has indicated that intradermal skin testing performed in
nonsedated dogs provoked hypercortisolemia, which was inhibited by prior sedation. 340 The hypercortisolemia produced in nonsedated dogs did not change intradermal skin test reactions, however. The combination of xylazine hydrochloride
(Rompun, 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg IV) and atropine sulfate is usually satisfactory for
skin testing and is probably the most common form of chemical restraint employed. 51. 57a, 318, 321 Other acceptable chemical restraint protocols include thiamylal
(17.5 mglkg IV) with or without maintenance with halothane, isoflurane, or methoxyflurane; tiletamine-zolazepam (4 mg/kg IV); and medetomidine (Dormitor,
10 1Lg/kg IV).321, 327, 328, 366, 387 Place the animal in lateral recumbency for testing.
3. The skin over the lateral thorax is the preferred test site. Because different areas
of skin vary in responsiveness, the site used should be consistent from patient to
patient. Gently clip the hair with a No. 40 blade, using no chemical preparation to
clean the test site. Use a felt-tipped pen to mark each injection site. Place injection
sites at least 2 ern apart, avoiding dermatitic areas,
4. Using a 26- to 27-gauge, 0.38-inch (0.9 ern) needle attached to a l-ml disposable
syringe, carefully inject, intradermally, 0.05 ml of saline or diluent control (negative
control) and 0.05 ml of 1: 100,000 histamine phosphate (positive control) and all
the appropriately mixed test allergens. Skin testing - strength antigens should have
been made fresh from concentrate within 12 weeks of use. Read the test sites at
15 and 30 minutes. Prevent the animal from traumatizing the test area.
5. By convention, a 2-plus (2+) or greater reaction is considered to be potentially
Significant and must be carefully correlated with the patient's history. With experience, positive reactions may be "guesstimated" by visual inspection. It is strongly
recommended, however, that the novice measure the diameter of each wheal in
millimeters, A positive skin test reaction may then be objectively defined as a
wheal having a diameter that is equal to or larger than that halfway between the
diameters of the wheals produced by the saline and histamine controls. In addition
to the objective assessment of size, a subjective assessment of erythema and
turgidity of the wheals is also used in determining a positive reaction. The size of
positive skin test reactions does not necessarily correlate with their clinical importance. Late-phase immediate reactions (6 hours) and delayed skin test site reactions (24 to 48 hours after injection) occasionally occur and are of unknown
significance. Pruritus at some positive reaction sites occasionally occurs and can be
managed with cold compresses or topical steroids. Systemic reactions (anaphylaxis)
to intradermal skin testing are extremely rare in dogs.
In Vitro Testing

• Serologic Allergy Tests. The radioallergosorbent test (RAST), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and liquid-phase immunoenzymatic assay are three tests that
detect relative levels of allergen-specific IgE in the serum. The RAST and ELISA attach
the allergens to be tested to a solid substrate such as a paper disk or polystyrene well.
The liquid-phase immunoenzymjitic assay (VARL) does not use a solid phase initially but
mixes a labeled allergen with the patient's serum.P" The combined labeled allergenantibody complex is subsequently bound by the label to the plastic well. This method in
humans has been shown to decrease the incidence of false-positive results due to background, nonspecific, "sticky" IgE,27, 315 This liquid-phase assay also avoids the conformational distortions of antigens and resultant hiding of epitopes inherent to solid-phase
techniques.
A small number of studies conducted with the early assays have shown problems with
reproducibility of some commercial ELISA, RAST, and VARL assays.P'" 344. 373 These
companies have made changes, but newer independent studies that show that these
problems have been alleviated have not been presented. Although these tests are pur-

590 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
ported to be species specific, one study revealed that the canine RAST, but not the
ELISA, indicated that all horses, goats, cats, and humans tested were also allergicP16 With
all of the technologies involving the determination of allergen-specific IgE, virtually all
normal dogs, all dogs with any kind of skin disease, and all atopic dogs, have at least one,
and usually multiple, positive reactions.t'" 323. 331, 344, 353, 363, 376
In a study evaluating a commercial ELISA test, results were positive in 7 of 12
normal dogs and negative in 10 of 36 atopic dogs, yielding an overall sensitivity of only
72.2% and a specificity of only 41.6%.341,342 Total serum IgE levels are very much higher
in dogs than in human beings, with the mean level in normal dogs reported to be about
190 p,g/ml, which is similar to that found in atopic dogs.29, 30, 61, 67a, 253 The highest serum
IgE levels are found in dogs with endoparasitism. Serial determinations of serum IgE
concentrations in West Highland white terriers from 6 weeks to 3 years of age did not
predict the development of atopy.201 It has also been shown in the dog that the higher
levels of total IgE contribute to an increased incidence of false-positive or irrelevant
serologic reactions.F" 345, 357 Total IgE levels in cats are also reported to be very high (175
to 850 p,g/ml).315
According to some researchers, false-positive results are rarely obtained with the
ELISA for allergen-specific IgGd in nonatopic dogs. 208, 318 This has become a controversial
point in Europe because another researcher has shown that many normal dogs have
allergen-specific IgGd. 236 Investigators in the United States, however, reported that allergen-specific IgG was detectable in the majority of nonatopic as well as all atopic dogs. 225
The results of serologic allergy testing correlate poorly or moderately with those of
intradermal allergy testing. 316, 323. 331, 344. 348, 353. 363. 376 Some laboratories with monoclonal
antibodies, mixed monoclonal antibodies, and Fcell lo-based systems for detecting the
canine IgE have reported improved overall correlation with intradermal testing, from 75%
to 90%, though there is still a variation depending on the allergen being tested." The
variation between individual allergens relates to their "stickiness" for background IgE.
In part, the discrepancies between serologic and intradermal testing may be explained
by numerous difficulties in technique, sensitivity, and so forth. It is also important,
however, to realize that they test for two different things, so complete correlations are not
expected (Table 8-16). IgG anti-IgE immune complexes are present in atopic dogs, which
may lead to inaccurate measurement of IgE.350 In addition, considering that some dogs
with negative intradermal skin test results or poor results with hyposensitization based on
intradermal skin tests respond well to hyposensitization based on in vitro test results, it is
valuable to have this alternative test available.F The differences may also indicate that two
types of IgE are present, that tissue-bound IgE does not correlate with circulating levels,
that tests have different sensitivities for different allergens, or that immediate skin test
reactivity and the presence of allergen-specific antibodies are no more than secondary
features (epiphenomena) of atopy.27. 29, 30, 61, 67a However, the results of breeding lines of
high-IgE responder dogs and their natural development of skin disease after the development of their IgE response suggest that IgE is important in the pathogenesis of canine
atopic disease. 394, 395
The point, here, is that false- or irrelevant positive reactions are to be expected with
serologic allergy testing. Hence, it is absolutely critical that (1) the candidates for testing
undergo meticulous work-up so that atopy is the only possible remaining diagnosis and
(2) the test results. obtained be very carefully evaluated in light of the patient's dermatologic history. These tests are not used for the diagnosis of atopy but to detect what an
animal produces allergen-specific IgE to as a way to select allergens for hyposensitization.27, 67a, 190. 195,363
Results with newer techniques have improved, the results with some allergens
having more positive results but most having fewer positive results.P? The technologic
variables being evaluated and applied to commercial tests include such things
as200, 315, 322, 335, 347, 351, 388, 389, 394, 395

"See references 322, 325a, 351, 367, 389, 394, 395.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 591
• Table 8-16

COMPARISON OF INTRADERMAL AND IN
VITRO ALLERGY TESTS IN DOGS

FEATURE

INTRADERMAL

IN VITRO

Detects reaginic antibody
Detects presence of reaginic antibody in serum
Detects presence of cutaneous mast cells with
reaginic antibody present on them
Determines capability of inducing a cutaneous
type I hypersensitivity reaction on exposure
to antigen
Test results are inhibited by antihistamines and
glucocorticoids
Sensitivity (per cent)
Specificity (per cent)
Risk to patient

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes

No

Yes

No·

70-90
>90
Rare but possible anaphylaxis
or sedative reaction
Limited to certain practices;
often requires referral
Inexpensive
Relatively high

70-100
0-90
Only serum sample required

Availability
Cost per antigen tested
Clinic overhead

Excellent
Relatively expensive
Little to none

"Chronic administration of glucocorticoids can reduce test scores or cause negative results.

1. Using monoclonal anticanine IgE antibodies instead of polyclonal antibodies
2. Using mixtures of monoclonal antibodies to detect IgE
3. Using the Fe receptor to detect IgE
4. Processing the patient's serum through a column of ascarid antigen to remove
parasitic IgE
5. Processing the patient's serum through a column with protein A to remove IgG

These techniques have been shown to improve the testing comparisons for the
respective companies and compared with intradermal test results. Limited studies have
compared two different commercial serologic tests and, in general, the comparisons were
made to intradermal test results. No studies have been conducted between commercial
companies with the different technologies based on the effectiveness of hyposensitization.
However, multiple studies have shown that the results of hyposensitization based on
serologic test results in atopic dogs are similar to that with intradermal testing results,
including one double-blinded comparison." These studies have used a wide variety of the
commercial tests available, and all appear to have similar results. Interestingly, even the
different technologic variables do not appear to Significantly influence the results of
hyposensitization because all the reports using the different companies appear similar in
response rates. Some companies offer group testing, but there is no place for such testing
because it leads to inappropriate treatment recommendations.
Another issue has been the effects of antipruritic therapies on in vitro test results. In
general, antihistamines, fatty acids, and other nonsteroidal drugs may be given without
affecting these tests. Short-term treatment with anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids
probably does not influence the results of serologic allergy testing,364 but long-term
treatment may cause false-negative reactions.F: 290, 344, 360. 389 It is also likely that there are
individual responses to clinically used glucocorticoid regimens. In one report, 50% of a
group of dogs that tested negative with an in vitro test experienced positive test results
when kept off of glucocorticoids for at least 1 month.P?
In summary, serologic allergy tests have numerous advantages over intradermal testing, including (1) no patient risk (no need to sedate; no risk of anaphylactic reactions),
(2) convenience (no need to clip patient's haircoat, chemically restrain patient, or keep
patient at clinic while preparing for, performing, and evaluating test), (3) lower likelihood
that results will be influenced by prior or current drug therapy, (4) the ability to be used

"See references 27, 265, 290, 317, 363, 378, 400, 408-410.

592 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
in patients with widespread dermatitis or dermatographism, and (5) similar results of
hyposensitization therapy in carefully clinically diagnosed atopic dogs. Canine IgE was
reported to be stable in serum samples subjected to 25 freeze/thaw cycles and when
incubated at 25°C for up to 10 days.223 The disadvantages of serologic tests are that they
are more expensive per item tested and that false-positive (clinically insignificant) results
are exceedingly common. Therefore, these tests are not appropriate to use for diagnosing
atopic disease but only for management.
Attempts to create in-office allergy screening tests have varied in their success at
correlating with in vitro or intradermal test results, or in discriminating between atopic
and nonatopic dogs." Even though these tests may have some value, they are limited
because hyposensitization still requires complete testing with individual allergens and the
diagnosis should not be made with tests but on clinical grounds.
Considering all the current available information, we and others suggest that intradermal testing is still the preferred method for diagnosis of canine atopy.61. 67a, 195, 265. 323, 331
When intradermal testing is not available, when intradermal testing gives negative results
in an otherwise classically atopic dog, or when hyposensitization based on intradermal
testing is unsuccessful, serologic allergy testing may be useful. Because intradermal testing
is not readily available, the response rate to hyposensitization based on in vitro testing is
preferred over the option of lifelong therapy with glucocorticoids. When serologic testing
is used, it is for the selection of allergens in dogs in which the clinical diagnosis of atopic
disease is strong. If one is attempting to use a test to help confirm the diagnosis of atopic
disease, an intradermal test should be performed.
• Basophil Degranulation Test. The in vitro basophil degranulation test has been
reported to show promise in the diagnosis of canine atopy.57. 58 The original test requires
fresh blood, must be run within 24 hours, is time consuming and labor intensive, and is
unlikely to become anything more than a research tool. The demonstration that canine
sera also binds to human basophils has made the test potentially more practical because
only serum will be needed.F" 381 Preliminary results in dogs showed an 89% correlation
with intradermal test results.?" A technique utilizing flow cytometry for the detection of
CD63 on human basophils activated by passive sensitization with canine serum is being
evaluated and may lead to this test being faster and less expensive and more readily
available.i"" However, further work is needed to determine whether it improves hyposensitization or diagnostic efficacy compared with other tests.
Major and Minor Diagnostic Criteria

Because of the difficulties associated with the in vivo and in vitro diagnosis of atopy, the
concept of major and minor diagnostic features has been introduced in an attempt to
provide consistency in the diagnosis of atopy in dogs and humans.W For dogs, the
following criteria have been proposed:
At least three of the following major features should be present:
• Pruritus
• Facial and/or digital involvement
• Lichenification of the flexor surface of the tarsus or the extensor surface of the
carpus
• Chronic or chronically relapsing dermatitis
• An individual or familial history of atopy
• A breed predilection
At least three of the following minor features should also be present:
• Onset of signs before 3 years of age
• Facial erythema and cheilitis
• Bacterial conjunctivitis
• A superficial staphylococcal pyoderma

'See references 341, 342, 351, 362, 367, 371, 394,

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 593

• Hyperhidrosis
• Immediate skin test reactivity to inhalant allergens
• Elevated allergen-specific IgGd
• Elevated allergen-specific IgE
To date, only one study has evaluated these criteria. 266, 268 Atopic dogs and nonatopic
dogs were evaluated, and the sensitivity and specificity of each of the Willemse criteria
were statistically analyzed. The authors concluded that pruritus, breed predilection, conjunctivitis, pyoderma, and skin and serologic test results were not useful criteria. These
authors suggested that the diagnostic criteria be revised as follows:
• Major Criteria
Bilateral lesions of the plantar surface of the interdigital spaces of the front
paws
Onset of signs between 6 months and 3 years of age
Peribuccal erythema or erythema of the medial surface of the pinnae
Anitis
Recurrent dermatitis for greater than 2 years
• Minor Criteria
Familial history
Exacerbation when the dog contacts vegetation (e.g., grass, weed).
Rhinitis
History of urticaria/angioedema
Acral lick dermatitis
Hyperhidrosis
Lichenification of the fold of the hock and/or the cranial surface of the carpus
In a study of 91 atopic dogs from Greece, lesions on the carpus and tarsus were
negatively associated with skin test positivity. 277
The reliability of using the Willemse major and minor criteria to diagnose canine
atopy and not other diseases has still never been proven. Additionally, it has been
suggested that a tentative diagnosis of atopic disease requires ruling out other major
possibilities because the criteria just listed determine what patients may have atopy, but
they do not exclude the possibility of some other diagnoses. 27• 67a We do not use these
criteria.
Histopathology

Skin biopsy of atopic dogs reveals variable degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis
(pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic) with lymphocytes and histiocytes usually predominating
(see Fig. 8-7A and B.28. 67a. 83. 84. 282 Mast cells may be increased in number. Though
statistically there is a very mild tissue eosinophilia.Pv 257 it is not usually noted during
routine histopathologic examination. The presence of a significant tissue eosinophilia suggests another or concurrent disease. Focal intraepidermal aggregates of eosinophils or
Langerhans' cells may be visible. 256 , 257 The presence of numerous neutrophils, plasma
cells, or both indicates infection, usually secondary bacterial pyoderma. Therefore, histopathology is more helpful in suggesting that further diagnostics are indicated and does not
confirm a diagnosis of atopy. Similar dermal changes of a milder degree may occur in
clinically normal skin from atopic dogs. Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary
bacterial pyoderma (suppurative folliculitis, perifolliculitis, intraepidermal pustular dermatitis) or Malassezia dermatitis are common in specimens of skin from atopic dogs.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Prognostically, atopic dogs have about an 80% chance of experiencing nonseasonal disease.
Natural desensitization is rare. One placebo-controlled study, however, revealed that about
20% of atopic dogs experience an improvement of greater than 50% after receiving an
immunotherapy placebo for 9 mcnths.w- In general, over 90% of atopic dogs can be
satisfactorily controlled. The client, however, must be made aware that treatment is

594 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-7. A, Canine atopy. Hyperplastic perivascular dermatitis. (From Scott OW: Observations on canine atopy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:91, 1981.) B,
Canine atopy. Perivascular accumulation of mononuclear
cells. (From Scott OW: Observations on canine atopy. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:91, 1981.)

usually required for life and that therapeutic modifications over the life of the dog are to
be expected.
Before the clinician discusses the details of therapy with the client, it is imperative to
mention that some allergens may be tolerated by an individual without any disease
manifestations, but a small increase in that load (one or more allergens) may push the

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 595

individual over the pruritic threshold and initiate clinical signs.61. 67a Equally important
when considering the cause of dermatologic disorders is the concept of summation of
effect-for example, a subclinical hypersensitivity in combination with a flea infestation, a
mild bacterial pyoderma, or a dry environment may produce marked discomfort that
would be absent if anyone of the disorders existed alone. 61, 67a Thus, it is important to
evaluate all possible contributions to the clinical signs in "allergic" dogs.
Education of the client is of key importance to the successful long-term control of the
atopic dog. The following are the key points that should be discussed with clients that
own atopic dogs.
Education Points to Consider

1. Atopic disease is a life-long problem.
2. It is controlled, not cured.
3. Many aggravating factors may cause flare-ups.
a. Allergen load/exposure
b. Stress
c. Boredom
d. Changes in heat, humidity
e. Skin trauma
4. Concurrent diseases complicate the control and require different therapies.
a. Fleas
b. Food hypersensitivity
c. Bacterial pyoderma

d. Malassezia
1. Dermatitis
2. Otitis
3. Paronychia
e. Secondary bacterial otitis extema
f. Fold dermatitis
g. Pododermatitis
h. Urine retention and skin irritation
i. Anal sac disease
5. Different aspects of the disease and complicating factors are what cause client and
owner dissatisfaction.
a. This may have profound effects on how the case is handled.
b. These need to be identified.
6. Clients must be agreeable and able to give or complete the treatment.
a. This may have profound effects on how the case is handled.
Therapy for atopy includes various combinations of avoidance, topical therapies (see
Chap. 3), hyposensitization, fatty acids and antihistamines (see Therapy for Hypersensitivity Diseases), systemic glucocorticoids (see Chap. 3), and occasionally immunosuppressive
drugs (see Chap. 9).27,34,61, 67a In most cases, a single drug does not give the safest and
most efficacious results, and the clinician should approach the management of the atopic
dog with a complete treatment plan,27, 213 Development of a treatment plan needs to
consider multiple variables, including seasonality, distribution and amount of involved skin,
cost, willingness and ability of the client to administer the treatment, acceptability to the
patient, and risk to the patient. Optimally, the clinician incorporates avoidance, topical
therapy (especially shampooing), and fatty acids into the treatment plan.
Avoidance

Avoidance of allergens is not always possible or practical. Such manipulations and their
benefits are not generally possible without accurate identification of the offending allergen(s) by allergy testing. Because many patients have multiple reactivities and most
allergens cannot be avoided, the effective use of this approach is rarely possible as a sole
therapy. It is still an important aspect of the management, however, because it often
decreases the allergen load, Additionally, some patients may greatly benefit from avoid-

596 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
ance of confirmed allergens such as feathers (pillows, birds), cats (dander), newsprint
(newspaper), and tobacco smoke.F" 61. 67a. 175, 282 With other allergens, complete elimination
may be impossible, but a decrease in exposure may be achievable (Table 8-17).175
Cat allergen can be common and persistent even in environments where cats no
longer live.F" Cat allergen is very stable and ubiquitous, and is found in dust samples and
clothing from homes where cats have never been kept. 197a Thus, avoidance may require
more than is often considered. However, attempts at controlling sources may be helpful.
For example, house dust mite exposure can be decreased by keeping the pet outdoors
more or at least out of bedrooms and off fabric furniture; mold exposure can be decreased by removing or cleaning mildewed items, houseplants, and carpeting in bathrooms
and by keeping bread refrigerated; cotton exposure can be decreased by avoiding laundry
rooms and closets and by making sure that the dog's bedding is made from synthetic
material. In atopic humans involved in a controlled trial wherein vacuuming and miticide
were used in an attempt to eradicate house dust mites, the number of mites decreased
but the patients derived no clinical benefit. 196
Other studies, including a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study, have shown that
if mites can be reduced by greater than 90%, benefit occurs, but the control measures
require more than vacuuming, and just limiting mite numbers in one area of the house is
not likely to be beneficia\.288 , 294 If the same is true in dogs, the complete home environment must change, not just areas where the dog sleeps or stays within the house. For
house dust mites, this is best accomplished by (1) minimizing carpets throughout the
house and having polished floors, (2) having as little fabric-upholstered furniture as possible with wood, vinyl, or leather furniture preferred, especially sofas, (3) reducing humidity
below 45%, and (4) covering pillow cases and mattresses with impermeable covers. This is
often not possible or practical, and other techniques of treating carpets with a variety of
acaricides, including benzyl benzoate and pirimiphos, have been described. Treating carpets and fabric furniture with acaricides may reduce mite levels by 70% to 90% for a

• Table 8-17

PRACTICAL ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
FOR THE ATOPIC CANINE

ALLERGEN

AVOIDANCE SUGGESTIONS

House dust
House dust mite

Keep dog out of room when cleaning/vacuuming for several hours
Use plastic zippered cover over dog bed
Wash bedding in hot water (>70°C)
Avoid letting dog sleep on overstuffed furniture (if dog sleeps on human's bed, use
plastic mattress/pillow covers)
Avoid stuffed toys
Keep dog overnight or during working hours in uncarpeted rooms
Frequently damp-mop the dog's "holding" room
Run air conditioner during hot and humid weather
Keep dog out of damp basements
Keep dog away from barns
Keep dog away while lawn is mowed
Avoid dusty dog foods
Clean and disinfect humidifiers
Avoid having large numbers of house plants
Avoid using as the dog's "holding" room any room with a high moisture level (bathroom, laundry room)
Keep dog out of crawl spaces under house
Use dehumidifiers
Clean with chlorine bleach solutions
Keep dog out of fields
Keep grass cut short
Rinse dog off after periods in high grasses/weeds
Keep dog indoors at dusk and early morning during heavy pollen season
Use air conditioners
Keep dog away while mowing lawn

Molds

Pollens

Modified from Bevier DE: Long-term management of atopic disease in the dog, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1491,
1990,

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 597

month but do not eliminate house dust mite allergen. 288 Tannic acid in carpets has been
used to denature house dust mite proteins.P'"

Tapical Therapy
Topical therapy is used in two main ways. The first is through shampoos and rinses, which
remove allergens from the skin and help to eliminate dry skin.27• 67a The second is through
topical antipruritic agents, which are usually most effective for treating localized areas of
pruritus. These therapies are covered in Chapter 3. In general, most atopic dogs should
be bathed at least every 1 or 2 weeks. It should be remembered that atopic dogs often
have sensitive, easily irritated skin. Hypoallergenic and colloidal oatmeal-containing shampoos are preferred. Shampoos and rinses containing the local anesthetic, pramoxine, are
useful.F"
• Hyposensitization. Hyposensitization (immunotherapy), which has been described
as the mainstay of therapy in canine atopy, is indicated in animals in which avoidance of
antigens is impossible, signs are present for more than 4 to 6 months of the year, and
other antipruritic drugs are unsatisfactory." This and avoidance are the only forms of
therapy that stop the allergic reaction, in contrast with most medical therapies that
counteract the effects of the allergic reaction. In humans, hyposensitization may even
prevent the development of new allergies, though this has not been shown in the dog. 397
In fact, some dogs that respond well to hyposensitization stop responding because of new
hypersensitivities that, in tum, do respond to a new immunotherapy formulation based on
repeat allergy testing.
Virtually no attempts have been made to standardize hyposensitization regimens in
the dog or to Scientifically compare their merits. Thus, published regimens vary in the
form of allergen used (aqueous, alum precipitated, propylene glycol suspended, glycerinated), the number and frequency of injections given in the induction phase, the dose of
allergen administered, the potency of allergenic extract, and the route of administration
(subcutaneous, intramuscular, intradermal). The vast majority of clinicians use only the
subcutaneous route when hyposensitizing for atopy. Numerous authors have written about
the benefits of hyposensitization, with most reporting a 50% to 80% rate of good to
excellent responses, whether based on intradermal or serologic testing. t A double-blind
study of hyposensitization in atopic dogs (alum-precipitated allergens vs. an alum-based
placebo) reported that 59% of the dogs experienced a good response with the vaccine and
21% of the dogs experienced a good response with the placebo.v" It is well accepted that
hyposensitization is an effective, valuable, and relatively safe treatment for atopic dogs.
The mechanism of action of hyposensitization is complex, with a variety of end-organ,
humoral, and cellular changes occurring in humans.P" Various hypotheses were proposed
in the past, such as (1) humoral desensitization (reduced levels of IgE), (2) cellular
desensitization (reduced reactivity of mast cells and basophils), (3) immunization (induction of "blocking antibody"), (4) tolerization (generation of allergen-specific suppressor
cells), and (5) some combination thereof'P" 61, 67a In humans hyposensitized for atopy, the
organ changes that correlate best with the clinical response are skin, nasal, and conjunctival sensitivity to titrated doses of allergen. At the cellular level, an increase in allergeninduced CD25+CD8+ T lymphocytes correlates with a favorable response.v" Atopic
humans successfully treated with IFN-y or cyclosporine usually have no decrease and,
often, an increase in IgE levels.292 This suggests the beneficial effect is not humoral but
cellular (switch from Th2 to Thl cytokine profile).
Three forms of allergens have been used for hyposensitization of atopic dogs.34 , 61, 67a
Aqueous allergens, which are rapidly absorbed, necessitate smaller doses, and require
multiple, frequent injections, constitute by far the most commonly used type today. A
variety of hyposensitization dose protocols are used, but most of the aqueous regimens are
modifications of the schedule shown in Table 8-18. Some specialists, including ourselves,
use just the two more potent concentrations and keep the intervals at no more than 14

"See references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 175, 188, 396, 398.
tSee references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 188, 290, 306, 363, 370, 398, 399, 402, 404, 405, 407, 408, 409, 413.

598 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Tahle 8-11S
INJECTION
NO.

HYPOSENSITIZATION SCHEDULE FOR
AQUEOUS ALLERGENS·

DAY NO.

1
2
3
4

VIAL I
( I 00 to 200 PNU/ml)t

4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20

6
7

8
9
10

11
12
13
14
15
16
17

VIAL 3
(10.000 to 20,000 PNU/ml)

0.1 ml
0.4 ml
0.4 ml
0.8 ml
1.0 ml

1

2

5

VIAL 2
(1000 to 2000 PNU/ml)

0.1 ml
0.2 ml
0.4 ml
0.8 ml
1.0 ml
0.1 ml
0.2 ml
0.4 ml
0.8 ml
1.0 ml
1.0 ml
1.0 ml

22
24
26
28
38
48t

"Injections are given subcutaneously.

t Protein nitrogen unit (PNU) value of each vial represents the total of all allergens used,
[Thereafter, repeat injections (1.0 ml) evcry 20 to 40 days, as needed.

days for the first 4 months of therapy. In addition, we use different schedules depending
on the size of the dog; Table 8-19 is one example of a small dog schedule. A preliminary
study used a rush protocol that takes only 6 hours to reach the maximum concentration of
20,000 PNUlml. This was reportedly done in 6 research and 14 clinical cases with no

• Tahle 8-19

HYPOSENSITIZATION SCHEDULE FOR DOGS
UNDER 20 POUNDS

.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
DAY

DATE

ITCH

. ..........

VOLUME

Viall
I

3
5
7
9
11
13
Vial 2
15
17
19
21
23
25

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.5

DAY

DATE

Five-Day Interval
30
35
40
Ten-Day Interval
50
60
70
80
Fourteen-Day Interval
94
108

122
136
150

• Grade itch on scale of 0 (none) to 10 (most severe this pet has had in the past).
• Note: it is possible to go higher than 10 if the itching is getting worse than ever before.
• Call at 4 weeks and report grade of itching.
• Call if itch goes up by more than 2 levels.
• Call prior to giving any more shots if there are adverse reactions .
• Vomiting, diarrhea, anxiousness, weakness are possible reactions .
• Reactions will usually occur within 1 to 2 hours after shot is given.
• Recheck appointments should be made around day 60 and day 120.
• Watch for pattern of itching in relation to when shots are given.
• Itch increases before shot is due, or after shot is given.
• Itch decreases after shot is given.

ITCH

VOLUME

0.5
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 599

increase in adverse reactions nor loss of efficacy noted.f" This type of protocol may be
indicated for cases requiring rapid hyposensitization because of particularly severe or lifethreatening allergic reactions such as venomous insect bites.
Alum-precipitated allergens are intermediate in action between the aqueous allergens
and emulsion allergens. They are more slowly absorbed than the aqueous allergens; as a
result, larger doses, fewer and less frequent injections, and more rapid hyposensitization
are possible. Concern has been expressed about the possible carcinogenicity of alum
precipitates, which are increasingly less available today. In the United States, alumprecipitated formulations for immunotherapy are available for only a small number of
allergens. In Europe, however, they are the allergens most commonly used and recommended..58• 412, 413 It has been reported that successful hyposensitization with these allergens was improved with a low-dose protocol.'!'
Emulsion allergens (aqueous allergens in propylene glycol, glycerin, or mineral oil) are
the most slowly absorbed, allowing the largest doses, the least number of injections, and
the most rapid hyposensitization.
By convention, in the past no more than 10 allergens were used at once for hyposensitization.v- 67a This has changed over the years as more investigators have used more
allergens, even up to 30." Success has safely been achieved with the inclusion of up to 30
or more allergens in aqueous vaccines for atopic dogs. 67a In fact, larger numbers may
increase the success rate. In one report,396 dogs were treated with up to 40 allergens, and
the response rate was 72% in dogs treated with 1 to 10 allergens, 86% in dogs treated
with 11 to 20 allergens, and 78% in dogs treated with 21 or more allergens. However, two
other studies did not find any difference in success based on number of allergens in the
vaccine.P'- 410 It has also been reported that, in animals with greater than 12 positive
results, treatment failures to the first set of antigens may respond when a second set
containing more allergens than the animal is allergic to are added as a new treatment
set. 4OO In animals with multiple sensitivities (e.g., 20 to 30 or more), the allergens should
be selected on the basis of history, the probable presence of that allergen in the environment, the frequency at which the allergen is known to react in that region, and the
duration of the allergen's presence.
Cross-reactivity may also be used in the decision. In general, cross-reactivity tends to
stay within families or closer relationships so that genera of the same family have some
cross-allergenicity, and species of the same genus have even greater cross-reactivity. Because grasses have fewer families, they tend to be the most cross-reactive, but the three
main grass families tend to be different.v" Bermuda grass is in the family Eragrostoideae
and does not cross with the Festucoideae, the more common northern pasture grasses.
Pancoideae, which includes Johnson and Bahia grass, cross-reacts somewhat with the other
two families. Weeds are less cross-reactive than grasses, and trees are the least crossreactive. All this information is based on allergens that commonly are found in humans,
and this may not be the same in the dog, as has been discussed for house dust mites
allergens.
Besides cross-reactivity, another issue is the effects allergens may have when combined. Studies have shown that molds, and to some degree insect allergens, contain
proteases that may break down other allergens, especially pollens. 403. 406 In the one
veterinary study, though protease degradation was documented, the author stated that
success with hyposensitization had apparently not been affected, as compared with other
published studies by the mixing of the mold allergens with other allergens (M. R.
Rosenbaum, personal communication, 1996).
Depending on each individual dog's response, and which form of the allergen is being
used, a beneficial response may occur as early as 2 weeks or as late as 18 months after
hyposensitization is begun. t "Booster" injections of allergens are administered as needed
(when clinical signs first begin to reappear) and, depending on the form of allergens

'See references 61, 67a, 396, 400, 405, 407, 409,
"See references 27, 34, 61, 67a, 188,306,370,398,400,402,405,407-409,412.

600 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
involved and the vaccine protocol being used, boosters may be needed every week to
every 6 months. When aqueous allergens are used, animals that require injections more
frequently than every 10 days are usually given smaller volumes of allergen.f" In general,
we use 0.1 mllday for these short intervals. Experience with the patient allows the owner
and the veterinarian to predict how long the patient will be asymptomatic after booster
injections. Boosters are then administered shortly before clinical signs would be expected
to flare up.
Intervals between boosters may vary at different times of the year. It is also important
to not overtreat and cause adverse reactions. In one study, decreasing the dose, with or
without decreasing the frequency, was done in all dogs that experienced any adverse
reactions, and the response rate increased significantly in that group of dogs.407 Adjusting
the hyposensitization treatment for each individual case is the most appropriate way to
maximize the response and, even when adverse reactions are absent and no exacerbations
prior to injections are observed, trying different protocols may increase efficacy.400
In general, atopic dogs require lifetime administration of vaccine. There is no strong
indication that sex, age, or duration of signs affects the success of hyposensitization,
though evidence is growing that age or duration may be important. This is true for human
patients with asthma and rhinitis who are hyposensitized.v" There is some evidence that
long-term disease (clinical signs for 5 years or more) and older age at the onset of clinical
signs (over 5 years old) indicate a poorer response to hyposensitization. 306, 402. 404, 409 One
of us (C.KC.) thinks that severity is more important, also somewhat related to chronicity,
and that dogs with excessive scarring do poorly.
Much of the inability to identify important variables may reflect the lack of studies
with large-enough numbers to see differences in these groups. Boxers and West Highland
white terriers have been reported to show a poorer response to hyposensitization.v" One
study evaluated 144 dogs on hyposensitization for over 1 year and divided the dogs by
breed into four groups: retrievers, spaniels, terriers, or other."? The retrievers experienced Significantly less response to hyposensitization (46% moderate or marked improvement) than did spaniels (69%), terriers (76%) and other (70%) groups.
Some authors report that the likelihood of successful hyposensitization is greater in
animals with few positive reactions; others disagree. 396, 398. 404, 409. 413 One study indicated
that low reactors (less than eight weak to moderate positives) responded better overall
than high reactors (more than eight strong reactions) but had a lower percentage of dogs
with an excellent response.s" However, one of us (C,KC.) thinks that animals with
numerous reactions, but reactions primarily limited to pollens, do better, Regional variations may also occur. One of us (C,KC.) with practices in Las Vegas and southern
California has observed a better success rate in Las Vegas (80%) than in southern
California (60%) with the same protocols,
Response to immunotherapy is allergen-specific.P" 398. 413 Thus, response to hyposensitization was much better in atopic dogs when it was based on allergy testing (70% good to
excellent responses) than when it was administered with standard regional allergens with
no regard to allergy testing (18%, identical to placebo responsel.v" The response to
specific types of allergens has not been well studied. Though controversial, it has been
reported that pollen-hypersensitive dogs do better than dogs with other types of hypersensitivity,61. 402 One study reported that mold-hypersensitive dogs did very poorly.402 However, another study reported similar success rates with hyposensitization in dogs that were
only mold-hypersensitive and those that were hypersensitive to various other allergens,408
Follow-up and compliance is critical to achieve the maximum success rate, One report
indicated that the compliance rate corresponds to the success rate,405 Similar observations
have been made by ourselves and other investigators.s"? Besides educating clients about
compliance and follow-up, it is important that they are educated about what to watch for.
Patterns of pruritus or signs related to when shots are given, overall level of pruritus,
changes in pattern of pruritus, and adverse reactions must be watched for. 400
Adverse reactions to hyposensitization are uncommon but may occur in up to 5% of
patients.s- 188,334,396 Minor reactions may occur in 25% of these dogs.407 Adverse reactions
include (1) intensification of clinical signs for a few hours to a few days, (2) local reactions
(edema with or without pain or pruritus) at injection sites, and (3) anaphylaxis. Serious

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 60 I

reactions have been reported to occur in less than 1% to 1.25% of these dogs. 29, 396
Adverse reactions are treated according to symptom. Intensification of clinical signs is the
most common side effect. It may indicate that the animal's maximum tolerance dose of
allergens has been exceeded and that the final hyposensitizing dose achieved needs to be
lowered, In humans, most studies on the possible long-term adverse effects of hyposensitization have failed to demonstrate any clinical or immunologic abnormalities. One study of
20 consecutive human patients with polyarteritis nodosa, however, revealed that, in six
patients, the onset of vasculitis symptoms coincided with hyposensitization for atopy.67a
Multiple other studies have failed to demonstrate any immunologic abnormalities.v"
In the severely affected, nonseasonally atopic dog, it may be necessary to control the
symptoms with systemic glucocorticoids during hyposensitization. As long as oral prednisolone, prednisone, or methylprednisolone doses are kept as low as possible and administered on an alternate-day basis (see Chap. 3), hyposensitization can still be successful. 61,67a
Avoiding glucocorticoids during at least the first few weeks of therapy allows one to
identify mild reactions and make adjustments, which is a good reason to try and avoid
those drugs early on.

Systemic Antipruritic Agents
Many atopic dogs require a systemic antipruritic agent, either as a sole agent or used in
conjunction with other treatments for an additive effect.v- 67a, 188 These agents were
discussed earlier in this chapter, but some points are important to consider when treating
atopic disease.
Systemic glucocorticoids are usually very effective for the management of atopy. They
are, however, the most dangerous of the treatments commonly used to treat atopy. As
such, their use should be limited to cases with active seasons lasting less than 4 to 6
months or for which safer options are not effective. Prednisolone or prednisone is administered orally (1 mg/kg q24h) in the morning until pruritus is controlled (3 to 10 days)
and then on an alternate-day (morning) regimen as needed (see Chap. 3). This schedule is
relatively safe compared with long-acting corticosteroids. Many atopic dogs have more
than one disease, and these drugs are less effective if there is any bacterial pyoderma or
Malassezia dermatitis present. Any animal not responding to rational treatments should be
re-examined to determine whether secondary infections or other complicating factors are
present. Efficacy of treatment may change as seasons and allergen loads change or as
other complicating factors occur. Clients need to be aware of this, and encouraged to
treat minor flare-ups early. Combinations with topical therapy, fatty acids, and antihistamines are often more effective than Single therapies.

Other Experimental and Therapeutic Agents
In humans with atopic dermatitis, studies have demonstrated therapeutic benefits of
cyclosporine.t-'' leukotriene antagonists,189 INF_1,212, 217. 271, 292 injectable allergen-antibody
complexes.F" thymopentin.v- 293 extracorporeal photochemotherapy,269 and Chinese herbal
therapy.212, 219 A double-blind trial in atopic dogs showed no benefit with homeopathic
drops that apparently had pollens in them.F" Other therapies being evaluated experimentally include peptide immunotherapy, anticytokine and cytokine receptor therapies, phosphodiesterase inhibitors, and anti-IgE therapy.P" 200, 235
In dogs, misoprostol (6 JLg/kg q8h) produced at least 50% reduction in pruritus in
over 50% of patients.P'' aroiylline (phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, 1 mg/kg q12h) was as
effective as prednisone but produced frequent gastrointestinal side effects 207; pentoxifylline
(10 mg/kg q8h) did not satisfactorily control pruritus'P", the combination of tetracycline
and niacinamide (250 to 500 mg of each q8h) was ineffective'", cyclosporine (5 to 10 mg/
kg/day) may be useful in severe, medically refractory cases (see Chap. 3).

Feline Atopy
Feline atopy (feline atopic disease) was first described in 1982, and in recent years it has
been shown that feline IgE exists.389. 416. 423, 424. 426, 430, 431, 447 It is also likely that feline IgE
is heterogeneous, which helps to explain some of the differences found when testing for

602 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
feline atopy.216,433 Feline atopy is a pruritic skin and/or respiratory disease in cats that, in
that aspect, is similar to human atopy.422, 433, 434. 444 Many affected cats experience positive
intradermal test reactions to environmental allergens.
The incidence of this disease is controversial, with some investigators stating it to be
the most common cause of allergy in the cat (73% of all allergic cats) or second in
incidence to flea bite hypersensitivity.P" 444 An inherited predisposition has not been
documented, though reports of cases with familial involvement suggest a genetic component. 453 This lack of well-documented genetic component is a major difference from other
species with atopic disease.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Feline atopy is caused by an exaggerated or inappropriate response of the affected cat to
environmental allergens, presumably involving skin-sensitizing IgE.433, 438 The most common environmental allergens are nonseasonal (positive reactions in over 90% of cats
tested).419, 442,453 In a study of 28 atopic cats, 50% were mainly positive to nonseasonal
allergens and 48% were reactive to both nonseasonal and seasonal allergens.v" This study
also reported immediate reactivity to flea allergen in 40% of the cats. In a study of 66
atopic cats, 50% were hypersensitive to fleas, 58% to only nonseasonal allergens, 39% to
nonseasonal and seasonal allergens, and 5% to only pollens.v" House dust mite reactions
(predominantly Demwtophagoides farinae) are the most prevalent of the nonseasonal
reactions, and generally 80% or greater of the atopic cats test positive.v" 433, 444
Other environmental allergens, even tobacco, may also cause reactions in some
cats. 433, 443, 444 Normal cats rarely experience positive reactions to Greer Laboratories house
dust mite antigens at 1000 PNUlml and, in eight normal cats, the VARL result was totally
negative:343, 421 Using the basophil degranulation test, 17% of healthy cats experienced
positive reactions to house dust mites and 33% of the cats with eosinophilic granuloma
experienced positive results, but this was not statistically significant.t'" It has also been
shown that cats with Otodectes infestation produce hypersensitivity reactions that may
cross-react with house dust mites. This could possibly explain some positive reactions to
house dust mites in normal cats. 278
Initially, the results of intradermal testing led to the hypothesis that this disease was
mediated by reaginic antibody." The determination of feline IgE and its role in skin
disease had been shown by a number of studies using P-K testing, PCA testing, and
ultrastructural studies demonstrating cutaneous mast cell degranulation only at sites of
positive intradermal allergen injections. 389, 416. 418, 430, 433, 447 A study with a monoclonal
antibody against a putative feline IgE showed reactivity against feline IgA and IgM as
wel1. 424 More recent studies have documented a specific polyclonal antifeline IgE as well
as the ability of the FCE RI-a assay to detect feline IgE.216, 389, 428, 431
IgE heterogeneity also exists in cats. 216 Skin lesions of atopic cats have an increased
number of Langerhans' cells, MHC class II dermal dendritic cells, and a predominance of
CD4+ T cells.446, 448-450, 452 Th2 cells and IL-4 expression may also playa role in feline
atopy, similar to the situation in humans and dogs. 448 These observations and some
preliminary results of patch testing with aeroallergens in cats suggest that the pathogenesis
is similar to that in humans and dogs. 446, 448-450 Studies in cats have shown that the highest
number of dermal mast cells is found in skin from caudal pinnae, which may explain some
of the head and neck lesions that may be visible when cats scratch at the pinnae. 427,435

CLINICAL FEATURES
No breed or sex predilections have been demonstrated. Young cats appear to be predisposed; 75% of the atopic cats with miliary dermatitis in one study experienced clinical
signs between 6 and 24 months of age. 453 The most consistent feature of atopy is pruritus,
which 100% of the cats with skin disease demonstrate. 61, 67, 414, 419, 438 The pruritus,

"See references 61, 67a, 416, 423, 424, 445, 453.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 603

however, may not be obvious to the owner, particularly in cats presenting with noninflammatory alopecia, and some cats are presented for respiratory disease alone. In these cases,
other indirect evidence of pruritus may be found, such as vomiting from hair balls, hair in
feces, tufts of hair in the eat's hiding areas, hair in the eat's teeth, and trichograms
revealing broken and chopped-off distal ends of hairs, suggesting licking and chewing as
the cause of the hair loss.
The clinical lesions of feline atopy are quite variable. The four most commonly
reported cutaneous reaction patterns are self-induced alopecia (fur mowing) (Fig. 8-8B),
eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions (Fig. 8-8C), miliary dermatitis, and initially nonlesional pruritus of the face, neck, and pinnae (Fig. 8-8A)." Some cats manifest various
combinations of these four patterns.v- 67a Erythematous macules, papules, and excoriations
may also be visible, usually in association with one or more of the more common lesions.
Recurrent swelling of the chin or lower lip (eosinophilic granuloma) may occur. The
pruritus and lesions may be localized or generalized.
Localized involvement often includes the abdomen, groin, lateral thorax, and caudal
thighs. The head, neck, and forelegs are also commonly involved. Although the pinnae are
commonly affected, the ear canals are usually spared. Some cats manifest a recurrent,
pruritic, ceruminous otitis externa that is typically misdiagnosed as ear mite infestation.
Rarely, cats manifest an erythematous papulopustular eruption characterized clinicopathologically as a sterile eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis.f" Noncutaneous signs may
also be observed. Sneezing was reported in 50% of the cases in one study, and conjunctivitis may also be present.v? Chronic coughing and feline asthma may occur in as many as
7.4% of the atopic cats, with or without concurrent skin disease.l" 433. 434, 444 As more
asthmatic cats are carefully tested for atopy, this percentage will likely increase. Lymphadenopathy is common in chronic cases that have miliary dermatitis, excoriations, or eosinophilic plaques.P" 45,3 Though secondary bacterial pyoderma is rarely reported as a complication of feline atopy, one of us (C.E.G.) frequently encounters it in chronic cases with
lymphadenopathy.
The incidence of concurrent diseases is quite controversial. A wide variation in the
incidence of concurrent food hypersensitivity has been reported, One study showed that
25% of atopic cats may have concurrent food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, or
both.v? Another retrospective survey of multiple practitioners indicated that 48% of atopic
cats had a component of food hypersensitivity.f" In a prospective study of 66 atopic cats,
8% had concurrent food hypersensitivity and 50% had concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity.444 Only one cat in this study had all three diseases. In another prospective study,
100% of the atopic cats had concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity and none was food
hypersensitive.t''? A study of 29 allergic cats reported that only one (3%) had concurrent
food hypersensitivity.t" The concurrent presence of flea bite hypersensitivity and/or food
hypersensitivity can greatly complicate the diagnostic work-up as well as the therapeutic
regimen,
DIAGNOSIS
The wide variation of clinical lesions reported in atopic cats requires the consideration of
a lengthy differential diagnosis for feline atopy. It is more practical to consider the
presenting lesion and history and then to develop a differential diagnosis, The most
common presentations are clinically noninflammatory alopecia, eosinophilic granuloma
complex lesions (see Chap. 18), miliary dermatitis, and pruritus of the face or pinnae. The
common differential diagnoses for these presentations include flea bite hypersensitivity,
food hypersensitivity, cheyletiellosis, otodectic mange, dermatophytosis, and psychogenic
alopecia.
The diagnosis of feline atopy is based on a compatible history and physical findings
along with ruling out the two major alternatives, flea bite hypersensitivity and food
hypersensitivity.61. 67a, 433, 441 Currently, a definitive diagnosis requires a positive intradermal

"See references 61, 67a, 414, 419, 420, 433, 434, 438, 441, 453,

FIGURE 8-8. A, Feline atopy. Facial excoriations. B, Feline atopy. Self-induced symmetric alopecia. Note
enlarged mammary glands, as this cat was receiving, but not responding to, megestrol acetate. C, Feline atopy.
Eosinophilic plaques and alopecia. Note the linearity to the lesions that occur from licking and the spaces that
correspond to skin folds that the tongue does not reach while the cat is curled to lick its abdomen. D, Contact
hypersensitivity affecting the glabrous skin with papules and patches of erythema. E, Contact hypersensitivity.
Axilla of affected dog shows erythema and papules-the primary lesions. F, Plastic dish dermatitis. The erythematous patch on the lip and alopecia are caused by contact with a plastic dish during eating. Note partial
depigmentation of the tip of the nose. G, Erythema and alopecia over the perineum, ventral tail, and caudal
thighs of a dog with food hypersensitivity, H, Severe edema, erythema and alopecia in a food hypersensitivityinduced eosinophilic vasculitis.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 605

FIGURE 8-9. Feline atopy. Cytologic examination reveals numerous eosinophils and lesser numbers
of nondegenerate neutrophils.

allergy test reaction, though it is likely that this requirement is not met in some atopic
cats because the test is difficult to interpret in many cats.?': 67a, 456 Good flea control and a
poor response to a 9- to 13-week hypoallergenic diet, respectively, are required to rule out
the two alternatives. In some cases, this approach may not be practical because it requires
keeping the cat indoors. In vitro tests are not used to diagnose atopy but only to help
select allergens when hyposensitization is being considered. Cytologic examination of skin
lesions usually reveals eosinophils and occasionally basophils, though this picture is not
specific for atopy but may also occur with food and flea bite hypersensitivity (Fig. 8-9).
The presence of degenerate neutrophils with intracellular bacteria indicates secondary
bacterial pyoderma. Peripheral eosinophilia is often present, unless the patient has recently received glucocorticoids. 67a
Allergy Testing

Intradermal skin testing has been considered the optimal method for diagnosing atopic
conditions in cats." Experience with intradermal skin testing is limited in the cat compared with the dog. One study evaluated testing solutions in normal cats and, overall, the
same protocol for aqueous allergens as that used in the dog was considered effective for
the cat. t Age, allergen, coat color, and sex have a minor effect on skin test reactivity.f"
Some normal cats reacted to low concentrations of allergen, particularly house dust,
firebush, and flea. However, it was shown that at least some of the reactions in normal
cats are not irritant but most likely are mediated by reaginic antibodies, because they
could be passively transferred.v" 430
• Procedure. The technique for feline intradermal allergy testing is similar to that
described in the dog, with the following exceptions:
1. Sedation with ketamine, ketamine and diazepam, tiletamine-zolazepam, or a gen-

eral gas anesthetic is usually used for restraint.v- 67a, 415, 437, 453
2. Extra care should be taken to make sure that all the injections are intradermal.
3. The test site should be examined at 5 and 20 minutes post injection because feline
reactions sometimes occur and fade rapidly, within 10 minutes.
4. Reactions, including those to histamine, are often much subtler (less erythema and
turgidity) than those in dogs.

'See references 61, 67a, 414, 415, 425, 438, 442.
'See references 61, 67a, 416, 419, 436, 445, 453.

606 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
A study has shown that intradermal skin testing in cats, with and without prior
sedation, produced marked increases in the concentrations of plasma cortisol, corticotropin, and a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone.v" This may explain the typically weak responses to skin testing in cats compared with dogs. It is also interesting that some atopic
cats are as reactive as any dog. Whether this reflects a different group of atopic cats or
has any prognostic significance has yet to be determined. Immediate skin test reactivity in
cats was reported to return 2 weeks after stopping oral prednisone administration and 4
weeks after the injection of methylprednisolone acetate.v"
Serum In Vitro Testing

Commercially available serologic allergy tests (RAST, ELISA) that claim to diagnose feline
atopy by detecting allergen-specific IgE are available. Only recently has it been shown that
cats have allergen-specific IgE.423, 424, 426, 430-432 D. Jarinae-specific IgE was detected in all
atopic, all normal, and all laboratory cats immunized with D. Jarinae, suggesting heterogeneity of IgE antibodies in cats. 430 The presence of D. Jarinae-specific IgE does not
distinguish among healthy, atopic, and D. Jarinae-immunized cats and does not correlate
with intradermal skin testing with D. Jarinae. 433 Serum IgE concentrations in cats are
increased by Toxocara cati infestations and by modified live virus vaccines. 433, 44 1 In vitro
tests have been compared with skin tests with variable results, generally poorer than those
obtained with intradermal skin testing.
A study compared the results of intradermal skin tests and a commercially available
serologic allergy test (ELISA) in atopic cats and concluded that the ELISA was not a
useful diagnostic test. 425 In another report evaluating the VARL, only 1 of 8 normal cats
reacted, whereas 6 of 12 suspected atopic cats reacted.P'" However, in experimentally
induced hypersensitivity or flea bite hypersensitivity, respectively, in vitro results were
similar to or more accurate than those obtained with intradermal testing. 36o, 430 Overall,
these commercial tests have not been evaluated in cats to the degree that they have in the
dog and, at this time, should probably not be used to diagnose atopy but only for the
selection of allergens for hyposensitization. Cats with confirmed allergic skin disease have
Significantly more IgGd directed against house dust, flea, and pollens than normal cats and
cats with nondermatologic illnesses. 429
Only one study has reported results of hyposensitization based on in vitro testing,
wherein success rates were similar to those based on intradermal testing. 434 Though we
have not reviewed the percentages, we have also seen cats respond well to hyposensitization based on in vitro tests. In cats, results of intradermal testing are often difficult to
interpret, which appears to be a disadvantage compared with in vitro testing. This also
makes the determination of in vitro sensitivity and specificity suspect if one uses the often
difficult-to-analyze results of intradermal skin testing as the standard. In addition, a
blinded study on the reproducibility of intradermal skin testing in cats has not been
reported. We have seen cats with poor intradermal test results but positive in vitro VARL
tests and good responses to hyposensitization. If only intradermal testing had been done,
hyposensitization would not have been possible in these cats. Thus, in vitro tests do have a
place in the approach to suspected atopic cats.
Basophil Degranulation Test

The in vitro basophil degranulation test has been reported to show promise in the
diagnosis of feline atopy:57,58 The Original test requires fresh blood, must be run within 24
hours, is very time consuming and labor intensive, and is unlikely to become anything
more than a research tool. The demonstration that feline sera also binds to human
basophils makes the test potentially more practical because only serum is needed.F" 380
Preliminary results in cats showed a 76.5% correlation with intradermal skin test results.F?
Histopathology

Skin biopsies of atopic cats are not diagnostic but are valuable for looking for evidence of
some of the alternative diagnoses.w 67o, 84, 455 Additionally, the histopathologic findings may
vary according to the clinical lesion sampled. Biopsy specimens from clinically noninflam-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 607

matory alopecic areas typically have a normal to slightly hyperplastic epidermis with a mild
superficial perivascular dermatitis wherein lymphocytes or mast cells are predominant
(Fig. 8-1OB). Inflammatory lesions (facial and pinnal pruritus, miliary dermatitis) reveal
moderate to marked epidermal hyperplasia, spongiosis, serocellular crusts, erosions or
ulcerations, and variable degrees of superficial or deep perivascular dermatitis, wherein
eosinophils are usually the dominant inflammatory cell (Fig. 8_1OA).455
Intraepidermal mast cells have also been seen in skin specimens from atopic cats,
primarily those with eosinophilic plaques." This finding is not specific for feline atopy.
Specimens from atopic cats with eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions reveal changes
typical of those lesions (see Chap. 18). In some cats, eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis are prominent.P" To date, atopy, food hypersensitivity, and flea bite hypersensitivity
cannot be differentiated histologically.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for feline atopy is good, although some cases are extremely difficult to
manage. Concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, and bacterial pyoderma greatly interfere with achieving a favorable therapeutic response, and care should
be taken to alleviate these complications. Treatment is usually required for life, during
which multiple different therapies may be used. The treatment plan may involve the use
of avoidance (see Canine Atopic Disease), glucocorticoids, antihistamines, fatty acids (see
Therapy of Allergic Diseases), and hyposensitization.v- 67a, 147,433
The treatment selected varies according to many client and patient factors. Generally,
the differences in risks of therapy among the different treatments is not gravely important
because cats appear relatively resistant to the acute and chronic side effects of glucocorticoids. 6a, 67a In addition, glucocorticoid regimens tend to be less expensive and more
convenient than the alternative forms of therapy. As a result, many atopic cats are
managed with some form of glucocorticoid therapy.6a,67a Topical therapy is uncommonly

FIGURE 8-10. Feline atopy. A, Miliary dermatitis reaction pattern. Perivascular and interstitial infiltrations of
predominantly eosinophils. B, Fur-mowing reaction pattern. Mild perivascular accumulations of mast cells and
lymphocytes. Note the epidermis is normal.

608 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
used in the cat owing to the actual or perceived difficulty in bathing cats. In cats that
tolerate bathing, however, and whose owners are willing, this practice can have a very
beneficial effect. Cats may also present the problem of not tolerating long-term pilling or
oral therapy. This is one indication for hyposensitization because we have seen numerous
cats that tolerate injections q7-30d much better than oral medications. If glucocorticoids
need to be avoided, antihistamines alone or in combination with fatty acids should be
tried.
Hyposensitization is an option available in cases for which intradermal skin testing has
determined what the cats are specifically allergic to. Hyposensitization utilizing either
aqueous or alum-precipitated allergens is reported to give favorable responses in 70% of
cases, though most studies concern small numbers of cats and do not involve long-term
follow-up." In one study of 29 cats with follow-up periods of greater than 1 year, 50% did
not respond or were lost to follow-up prior to assessing response. Of those that stayed
with hyposensitization, 47% responded with a moderate or better response.v" It was also
reported that the response at 12 months was similar to that in the literature but decreased
with the longer follow-up penods.f"
Hyposensitization based on serum in vitro testing has also been reported effective,
with 75% of the cases improving over 50%.434 This study also indicated that different
response rates may occur, depending on the type of lesions present. In this report, though
the numbers were small, 100% of linear eosinophilic granulomas and 95% of the indolent
ulcers responded well; the poorest response was in cats with self-induced alopecia, with
53% responding. Most interesting was the 90% response in cats with asthma. Further
work looking at the different presentations of atopy is needed to confirm these observations.
In some cats, hyposensitization is the best option other than repositol glucocorticoids
because it is given by injection and relatively infrequently (once the maintenance dose is
reached). Many cats tolerate the injections better than long-term oral medications. Some
dermatologists use the same immunotherapy protocol that they use for the dog; others use
a schedule similar to the one they use for small dogs (see Canine Atopy). One of us
(C.KG.) has found that many of the cases that respond to hyposensitization stay improved, even with a lower volume (0.5 ml) of maintenance injections, and uses a different
protocol in cats from even the small dog protocol (Table 8-20).
Anecdotal reports indicate that chlorambucil or cyclosporine may be useful in severely
atopic cats that do not respond to conventional therapies (see Chaps. 3 and 9).433.441

Contact Hypersensitivity
Contact hypersensitivity (allergic contact dermatitis) is a rare, variably pruritic, maculopapular or lichenifled dermatitis usually affecting sparsely haired skin in contact areas.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Only a few reports of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats have
been documented by patch testing, yet this is a common and well-studied problem in
human dermatology.'"•. 458 Much of the veterinary literature and data on naturally occurring allergic contact dermatitis in dogs and cats are of dubious validity and value. In
reality, there is often a huge overlap between what has been called contact hypersensitivity and primary irritant contact dermatitis in the veterinary literature. 29. 30, 61, 67. Though
experimentally induced irritant and allergic contact dermatitis can look histologically very
different in dogs and humans at 24 hours, the chronic lesions in natural cases may be
impossible to differentiate.Vv 483
Classically, contact hypersensitivity represents a type IV hypersensitivity reaction
wherein histologically lymphocytes are the dominant cell type.v 23, 3D, 49, 53, 58, 61, 67a, 76, 457. 458. 472

'See references 414, 419, 433, 434, 436, 438, 442, 445, 453.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 609
• Table 8-20
DAY

DATE

HYPOSENSITIZATION SCHEDULE FOR CATS
ITCH

VOLUME

Viall

1
3
5
7
9
11
13

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

Viol 2

15
17
19
21
23
25

DAY

DATE

ITCH

VOLUME

Five-Day Interval

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.5

30
35
40

0.5
0.5
0.5

Seven-Day Interval

47
54
61
68

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

Ten-Day Interval

78
88
98
108
118

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

• Grade itch on scale of 0 (none) to 10 (most severe this pet has had in the past).
• Note: it is possible to go higher than 10 if the itching is getting worse than ever before.
• Call at 4 weeks and report grade of itching.
• Call if itch goes up by more than 2 levels.
• Call prior to giving any more shots if there are adverse reactions
• Vomiting, diarrhea, anxiousness, weakness are possible reactions.
• Reactions will usually occur within 1 to 2 hours after shot is given.
• Recheck appointments should be made around day 60 and day 120.
• Watch for pattern of itching in relation to when shots are given.
• Itch increases before shot is due, or after shot is given.
• Itch decreases after shot is given.

Most of the work on the pathogenesis of contact hypersensitivity has been performed in
laboratory animals. In contrast with irritant reactions, allergic contact reactions are characterized by a immunologic reaction to a hapten, usually a small, chemically reactive, lipidsoluble molecule that binds to a protein to become a complete antigen. 472 The hapten
protein complex binds to, and most likely is pinocytosed by, epidermal Langerhans' cells,
which induces an increase in Langerhans' cell size, MHC II expression, and IL-1f3
synthesis.
The initial presentation and processing of the hapten is called the afferent phase of
allergic contact reactions. This phase is thought to require transfer of stimulated haptencontaining Langerhans' cells from the skin to regional lymph nodes. This emigration from
skin to lymph nodes may be initiated by TNF-a. 458 These T cells are stimulated to express
skin-homing ligands that direct their movement to the skin. Langerhans' cell numbers are
decreased in contact hypersensitivity because of their emigration to the lymph nodes but
not in primary irritant contact dermatitis.v"
The efferent phase or elicitation phase occurs in response to exposure to hapten in an
already sensitized animal. Though some Langerhans' cell migration may occur, much of
this reaction may occur locally. The activated memory T cells are recruited to the site of
hapten exposure by expression of adhesion molecules, such as VCAM-1, E-selectin, and
ICAM-1 on the vascular endothelium. ICAM-1 is also expressed on keratinocytes and may
result in the diapedesis of lymphocytes. TNF-a is rapidly released from Langerhans' cells
and keratinocytes after hapten exposure and stimulates the expression of E-selectin and
VCAM-1 on the endothelial cells. 211 , 458, 472 TNF-a is also released from cells in response
to substance P, a neuropeptide that may be released as a result of the interaction between
Langerhans' cells and nerve fibers. 458 Other epidermal cytokines involved include IL-6 and
MIP. Which cytokines are associated with allergic contact and not irritant contact dermatitis is an area receiving extensive study. It appears that the differences in IL-1f3, IL-6, IL12, and IFN-y may be key factors.F- The production of IL-12 may be central to the
development of a Th1 cell response.v"

61 0 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

Newer information blurs the distinction between immunologic and nonimmunologic
events and makes differentiation problematic.f" The clinical and histopathologic features
overlap greatly. Langerhans' cells are just as actively involved in irritant as allergic reactions (decreased numbers, apposition of lymphocytes). Virtually all cytokines identified in
allergic reactions are also present in irritant reactions (ICAM-l, IL-2, TNF-a, LFA-l).
The percentage of T-cell subtypes, Langerhans' cells, macrophages, and activated antigens
are not Significantly different. Even patch testing produces the same cytokine profile and
so forth. Some authors conclude that the difference between irritant and allergic reactions
is more conceptual than demonstrable.v?
The last phase of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity is the resolution phase.
Less is known about this phase, though IL-IO may play an important role as it interferes
with Th2 cell cytokine production. IL-IO is upregulated in keratinocytes in the late phase
of allergic contact reactions. Basophils, which begin to migrate into late lesions, may also
be involved in stimulating resolution.f"
In dogs, histopathologic examination has given conflicting and confusing results.v?s
In a Danish study wherein positive patch test reactions underwent biopsy and histopathologic examination, the neutrophil was the dominant inflammatory cell.482 In another histopathologic study of experimentally induced contact hypersensitivity to DNCB in
dogs, the histopathology was similar to that seen in humans and laboratory animals, with
lymphocytes and macrophages predominating. 483 Limited case studies in the dog have
also implicated eosinophils as a cellular component of contact hypersensitivity in the
dog.461, 463, 465, 470, 475 These contrasting findings most likely reflect the problems of differentiating cases of contact-induced atopic disease and irritant dermatitis from true type IV
hapten-induced contact hypersensitivity. Further work in this area is needed.
It has been noted that atopy is present in about 20% of the dogs with contact
hypersensitivity.f" This is in contrast with humans, wherein atopic dermatitis is associated
with a lower incidence of contact hypersensitivity.v" Whether this reflects similar breed
predispositions, similarities in basic immunologic pathogenesis between contact hypersensitivity and atopic disease, misdiagnosis of contact atopic disease as contact hypersensitivity,
or abnormalities in the epidermal barrier of atopic dogs that predispose to penetration of
haptens that cause contact hypersensitivity remains to be determined. In fact, canine atopy
itself may be a type of contact hypersensitivity, a type I (immediate) contact hypersensitivity (see Canine Atopy), and can cause positive patch test results, which could easily
confuse the diagnosis.
Experimental attempts to induce contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats have given
inconsistent results. Nobreus and colleagues.f" using a modified "maximization technique"
of intradermal and topical sensitization, successfully sensitized dogs to dinitrochlorobenzene. They showed that the sensitization could be transferred to normal dogs with
thoracic duct lymphocytes and that sensitization could be suppressed with antilymphocyte
serum. Krawiec and Gaafar466 as well as Conroy483 successfully sensitized dogs to dinitrochlorobenzene with either intradermal and topical or topical challenge. Schultz and
Adamss" reported that helminth antigens, tissue antigens, viral antigens, bacterial antigens, fungal antigens, protein antigens, dinitrochlorobenzene, and mitogens had been used
experimentally and clinically in dogs and cats to elicit delayed-type hypersensitivity responses in the skin, with limited reproducibility or irreproducible results. Schultz and
Maguire 478 induced delayed-type hypersensitivity in normal cats with dinitrochlorobenzene.
Spontaneous, well-documented cases of contact hypersensitivity are rare in the veterinary literature. Though poison ivy and poison oak may be transferred to humans from
dogs carrying the oleoresins in their haircoats, only rare cases occur in the dog, and
documentation of these by patch testing has not been published. Other plants, however,
have rarely been documented as a cause of contact hypersensitivity. Kunkle and Cross'"?
reported a beautifully documented case of naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity to
Tradescantia fiuminensis (wandering Jew plant) in a dog. Sensitivity to Hippeastrum
(Amaryllidaceae) leaves and bulbs was documented in a dog in the Netherlands.v" Three
cases were described with positive patch to plants belonging to the Commelinceae family
(Commelina diffusa [spreading dayflower], Murdannia nudiflora [doveweed], and Trades-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 61 1

cantia jluminensis [wandering Jew]).469 One dog was also atopic, all three dogs tested had
a favorable response to pentoxifylline, and one underwent a biopsy of the positive patch
test site that was characterized by an eosinophilic infiltrate. Asian jasmine was also shown
to be a cause in a case documented with patch testing and resolution upon avoidance.F?
Interestingly, in this last case, multiple intraepidermal eosinophilic microabscesses were
revealed on histopathologic examination of the patch test site.
Dandelion leaves were well documented as a cause in one dog. 465 Cedar wood was
also reported as a cause of contact hypersensitivity, although patch testing was not performed to document the case. 463 Indoor or synthetic products that contain allergens are a
major cause of disease in humans but, again, are rarely documented to cause disease in
dogs. In a Danish study, confirmed contact hypersensitivity to the following substances
was documented: thiuram mix, cobalt chloride, nickel sulfate, quinoline mix, colophony,
black rubber mix, wood alcohols, epoxy resin, balsam of Peru, carba mix, formaldehyde,
fragrance mix, ethylenediamine, primin, wood tar, and naphthyl mix.481, 482 Two other dogs
were patch test positive to colophony, a pine oil resin, and this correlated with reaction to
cleaning products.v" Two different reports described reactions caused by exposure to
cement. 462,475
Well-documented cases were also reported in three dogs that were allergic to synthetic textiles, though the allergenic component was not identified.v" Carpet deodorizer
and a plastic shopping bag were suspected, but not proven, to be contact allergens in a
dog464 and cat,471 respectively. Bleach has also been reported to cause reactions in two
dogs. 462 Neomycin is a commonly mentioned but rarely documented contact allergen in
dogs and cats. 476, 485 Because it is often present in otic preparations, neomycin is most
frequently incriminated as a cause of "allergic contact otitis externa." Contact dermatitis
accounted for about 43% and 27%, respectively, of the idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse
drug reactions recognized in dogs 166 and cats.l 65
It can be concluded from the preceding summary of investigations that contact
hypersensitivity can be induced in dogs and cats, but only with difficulty and with
inconsistent results compared with tests on humans and guinea pigs. The incidence of
naturally occurring disease is much lower than in humans and rarely as well documented
as in humans. Additionally, the pathogenesis of the lesions needs to be studied because
there may be species differences or even multiple pathogenic mechanisms in the dog, as
evidenced by the strikingly different histopathologic findings reported from clinical lesions
or in positive patch tests. It is likely that some of the cases reported with positive patch
tests may reflect contact atopic disease and not true hapten-induced contact hypersensitivity.483

CLINICAL FEATURES
Naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity is reported to account for about 1% to 10% of
all canine dermatoses'": 67a, 462, 468, 474, 485 and to be rare in cats. We consider it a very rare
disease. A 1993 symposium on contact hypersensitivity in the dog presented very small
numbers of cases, and most case reports were very old. 461, 463, 465, 470, 475 Waltonv" reported
that over 20% of his cases of canine contact hypersensitivity occurred in yellow Labrador
retrievers. In a study of 22 cases (confirmed by closed patch testing) of contact hypersensitivity in dogs in Denmark.v" 50% of the dogs were German shepherds, whereas this
breed accounted for only 16% of the purebred registered dogs. Other breeds described
but not documented to be at increased risk are Wirehaired fox terriers, Scottish terriers,
West Highland white terriers, and Golden retrievers.F" These are breeds also at risk for
atopy. French poodles are also reported to be at risk,474, 482 No age or sex predilection has
been documented.
Although contact hypersensitivity can be produced in dogs after a 3- to 5-week
sensitization period, the sensitization period for dogs and cats with naturally occurring
disease exceeds 2 years in over 70% of cases.P- 67a. 474. 481. 484 Substances reported to cause
naturally occurring "allergic contact dermatitis" in dogs and cats are listed in Table 8-21.
Again, virtually none of these substances, other than those previously listed, has been well-

612 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
• Table 8-21

SUBSTANCES REPORTED TO CAUSE
NATURALLY OCCURRING "ALLERGIC
CONTACT DERMATITIS" IN DOGS
AND CATS

SUBSTANCE CATE-

EXAMPLES

GORY

Plants

Medications

Highly chlorinated water
Home furnishings

Pollens and resins (grasses, trees, weeds), jasmine blooms, poison ivy, poison
oak, wandering Jew, dandelion leaves, Asian jasmine, cedar wood, Hippeastrum
Numerous topicals (especially neomycin, bacitracin, thiabendazole, tretinoin,
miconazole, polyhydroxidine, tetracaine and other "caines"), numerous otic
preparations, soaps, shampoos (especially those containing tars, creosols, and
benzoyl peroxide); petrolatum, lanolin, disinfectants, insecticides (shampoos,
dips, sprays, flea and tick collars and medallions; especially d-limonene,
rotenone)
Fibers (wool, nylon, synthetics), dyes, mordants, finishes, polishes, cleansers,
rubber and plastic products, detergents, cat litter, collars (leather, metal),
deodorants, cement, nickel, dichromate

documented with patch testing, and even less with typical histopathology of the positive
patch test sites. None reported on results of intradermal testing with similar extracts or of
testing with protein-free extracts. Such studies may help to determine whether these
animals have type IV hypersensitivity or IgE-mediated diseases.
Clinical signs of contact hypersensitivity include varying degrees of dermatitis, which
tend to be confined to hairless or sparsely haired areas of skin in contact regions: ventral
aspect of paws (not pads) (Fig. 8-11B); ventral abdomen (see Fig. 8-8D), thorax (see
Fig. 8-8E), tail, and neck; scrotum (see Fig. 8-11C and D); point of chin; perineum; and
lateral aspect of pinnae. However, with chronicity, lesions may spread to involve larger
areas that may seem less typical of a contact pattern and involve normally haired areas.
Importantly, these cases have a history of slowly spreading into these adjacent areas as
hair loss progresses at the margins of erythematous pruritic lesions. If the allergen is in a
topical medicament in liquid, aerosol, or powder form, cutaneous reactions may also be
visible in haired areas as well (see Fig. 8-11A). Reactions to rubber or plastic dishes and
rawhide chew toys are usually confined to the lips and nose (see Fig. 8-8F). Lesions in
ring patterns around the neck, though now less common with the newer collars, used to
be a problem with flea collars, particularly in cats (see Fig. 8-11E).
Acute skin lesions consist of various combinations of erythema, macules, papules, and,
rarely, vesicles. Although vesicles are the classic lesions in most species, they are rare in
dogs and cats and often manifest themselves only at the microscopic level in acute lesions.
Chronic lesions are often alopecic plaques that may be hyperpigmented or hypopigmented, excoriated, and lichenified. Secondary bacterial pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis,
seborrheic skin disease, or combinations of these may be present.f'< 481, 484. 485 Pruritus
varies from mild to intense. Contact hypersensitivities may be seasonal or nonseasonal,
depending on the allergens involved. In households with several dogs or cats, involvement
of a single animal would suggest hypersensitivity, whereas clinical signs in several animals
would point to irritant reactions or contagious disease.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes primary irritant contact dermatitis, atopy, food hypersensitivity, canine scabies, insect hypersensitivity, Pelodera dermatitis, hookworm dermatitis, staphylococcal folliculitis, and Malassezia dermatitis. Definitive diagnosis is based on
history, physical findings, and results of provocative exposure and patch testing with
appropriate histopathology. Provocative exposure involves avoiding contact with suspected
allergenic substances for up to 14 days.": 67a. 468. 474, 485

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 613

FIGURE 8-11. Contact dermatitis. A, Contact dermatitis due to neomycin (Panolog) on the bridge of the nose of a dog.
B, Alopecia, erythema, and lichenification of the ventral paws, one of the common patterns of disease in contact dermatitis.
C, Crusting, erythema, erosions of the scrotum form contact dermatitis, a commonly affected site in male dogs and it may
be the only area of involvement. D, Canine brucellosis. Scrotal ulceration due to licking. E, Alopecia, erythema, erosions,
and crusting in a cat with a flea collar reaction demonstrating the classic ring of lesions around the neck.

6 14 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

The animal is first bathed with a nonirritating, hypoallergenic shampoo to remove all
possible allergenic substances from the skin and haircoat, then placed in a "nonallergenic"
environment for up to 14 days. The animal is then re-exposed to its normal environment
or to suspect substances, one at a time, and is observed for an exacerbation of the
dermatosis over 7 to 10 days. Provocative exposure is time consuming, requires a patient
and dedicated owner, and is frequently impossible to undertake. Additionally, without
biopsy or patch testing, provocative exposure does not reliably distinguish among contact
allergy, atopic disease, and irritant skin reactions. To better define the reactions, skin
biopsy specimens taken from acute lesions induced by the exposure should be studied.
The patch test is the method for documenting contact hypersensltivity." 50. 61. 67 a, 474, 481,
482, 484, 485 In the classic closed patch test, the test substance is applied to a piece of cloth
or soft paper that is then placed directly on intact skin, covered with an impermeable
substance, and affixed to the skin with tape. After 48 hours, the patch is removed and the
condition of the underlying skin examined. Owing to the logistical problems of applying
and securing patch test substances to dogs and cats, patch testing is rarely done. The
sliding of the material and irritation from tape leads to much misinterpretation of results.
The use of ether to remove the tape and the adhesive (Scanpar) tends to minimize but
not eliminate these problems.f"
Waltcnv" recommended open patch testing in the dog and listed suggested allergen
concentrations and vehicles for canine patch testing. In open patch testing, the allergen is
merely rubbed into a suitable marked test site of normal skin and the test site is then
examined daily over 5 days. Waltorr'v' reported that positive patch test reactions in dogs
are much less inflammatory than those in human beings and guinea pigs, usually consisting of mild erythema and edema and variable degrees of pruritus. In a Danish study, 63%
of the affected dogs were monosensitive and 23% were sensitive to two allergens. 482
For now, performing closed patch tests with suspected allergens in their natural state
is probably the most sensible way to proceed. The dorsolateral thorax is gently clipped,
and suspected allergens are applied to the skin (preferably with Scanpar), taped in place,
and secured under a body bandage. The test materials are removed in 48 hours, and the
test sites are observed for the following 3 to 5 days. Optimally, test sites should undergo
biopsy, but more fulminant reactions can be considered positive. The nature of the
reaction is not determined without biopsy of these acute lesions. Additionally, substances
eliciting positive reactions should be tested on normal animals to make sure that they are
not irritants.
A standardized patch test kit has been recommended for dogs.474, 482 Limited testing
with this kit in control dogs had been undertaken until a study indicated that 83.3% of
normal dogs responded to one or more allergens, suggesting that this human kit is not
appropriate for testing in dogs at the recommended strengths. 459 Further work at different
strengths is warranted before this test can be used in the dog, and it has not been
evaluated in cats. Additionally, many of the documented causes of contact hypersensitivity
in dogs would have been missed by the test because the allergens were local plants or
materials not included in this standard battery. Therefore, a complete work-up still requires that materials from the dog's local environment be tested in addition to the
standardized battery. These natural materials can be chopped up, mixed with petrolatum,
and applied with the Finn Chambers or placed in the center of a 2-inch gauze pad.
Histopathology

In experimentally induced contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats, skin biopsy revealed
varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis, with mononuclear cells predominating.466 , 478, 483 In other attempts to induce type IV hypersensitivity reactions in dog and cat
skin, however, biopsies revealed varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis in
which neutrophils prevailed.f?" Reports of natural cases also have revealed significant
numbers of eosinophils.w- 469, 470, 483
In naturally occurring contact hypersensitivity of dogs, cats, and human beings, skin
biopsy is nondiagnostic, showing varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis
(spongiotic, hyperplastic) wherein neutrophils, mononuclear cells, or eosinophils may pre-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 61S

dominate.t- 28, 61, 67a, 458 Specimens taken from positive patch test reaction sites in dogs
with spontaneous contact hypersensitivity revealed that neutrophils were the dominant
dermal inflammatory cell and were commonly associated with neutrophilic exocytosis and
even focal epidermal necrosis.v" These changes are unexpected and suggestive of irritant
contact dermatitis, No significant differences are found in the number of mononuclear
inflammatory cells or in their subclasses in skin from humans with allergic or primary
irritant contact dermatitis.v 50 Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary bacterial
pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, seborrheic skin disease, or combinations of these may be
present,

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for contact hypersensitivity depends on the offending allergen, Therapy of
contact hypersensitivity in dogs and cats may include avoidance of allergens or the use of
glucocorticoids, Avoidance of allergens is preferable but may be impossible, either because
of the nature of the substances or because they cannot be identified, In such instances,
pentoxifylline or glucocorticoids are usually effective but are often needed for life. In
some animals, management may consist of topical glucocorticoids alone (see Chap. 3).
Other animals require systemic glucocorticoids, Prednisolone or prednisone may be administered orally at 1 mg/kg (dog) or 2 mg/kg (cat) daily for 5 to 7 days and then on an
alternate-day regimen as needed (see Chap. 3), Pentoxifylline (a methylxanthine derivative) suppresses the production of TNF -a by leukocytes and keratinocytes, It also downregulates adhesion molecule expression, and the oral administration of the drug in humans
with contact hypersensitivity gives variable results,46o,480 Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg q8h) was
shown effective in preventing the development of contact hypersensitivity in the canine. 469
Topical application of pentoxifylline was ineffective in treating humans with contact hypersensitivity."?
Hyposensitization to certain contactants has been shown to be possible in humans.F: 50
Such hyposensitization, however, is usually limited and temporary. In general, attempts
to hyposensitize human beings, dogs, and cats to contactants have been totally unsuccessful."

Canine Food Hypersensitivity
Food hypersensitivity (adverse food reaction, food allergy, food intolerance) is a nonseasonal, pruritic skin disorder of dogs that is associated with the ingestion of a substance
found in the dog's diet. 496, 501, 529 Presumably it is a hypersensitivity reaction to an antigenic ingredient. This may not always be the case, however, and toxic food reactions and
nontoxic, nonimmunologic reactions (intolerances) may also be occurring and be incorrectly called food hypersensitivity. Toxic reactions are usually dose related, occur in any
individual, and are often associated with histamine or bacterial toxins in the food.
In one study of North American commercial pet foods, the histamine contact varied
from 0.6 to 65.5 J-Lg/g. 502 This amount is probably insufficient to cause histamine toxicosis
but might be enough to enhance existing pruritus in some animals. Food intolerances are
an individual sensitivity to a food that may occur by a variety of nonimmunologic mechanisms, including metabolic, pharmacologic, and idiosyncratic. Their clinical differentiation
from allergy is rarely accomplished or necessary.P': 67a, 504, 505, 523 The term food hypersensitivity is still accepted, however, because of its common usage and because of the difficulty
differentiating between hypersensitivity and intolerance in practice. 67a,505

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Diet has long been recognized as a cause of hypersensitivity-like skin reactions in dogs,
cats, and human beings. Although the pathomechanism of food hypersensitivity is unclear,
"See references 22, 50, 61, 67a, 481, 482, 484,

6 16 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
type I hypersensitivity reactions are well documented and the most common type of
hypersensitivity reactions in humans, although type III and IV reactions have been suspected. Cutaneous type I reactions are associated with both immediate and late-phase
reactions.v- 67a. 505. 523 Immediated (within minutes to hours) and delayed (within several
hours to days) reactions to foods have also occurred in the dog and cat,61, 67a, 491, 517, 535
Why the skin is a frequent target of food-induced hypersensitivity is not well known,
though it has been recognized in humans that cutaneous lymphocyte antigen is induced
on T cells when cutaneous disease is present but not on T cells in food-related respiratory
disease.Y' Whether sensitization occurs in the intestinal mucosa or to absorbed allergen is
unknown. Normally the gut possesses several mechanisms that make up the intestinal
mucosal barrier, which blocks the absorption or the entering of foreign antigens into the
body. Antigens are normally broken down by the effects of gastric acid enzymes, pancreatic and intestinal enzymes in the gut lumen, and intestinal cell lysosomal activity. Intestinal peristalsis also acts to decrease absorption of potential antigens by removing antigens
trapped in the intestinal mucous.
The intestinal mucosal barrier is composed of a protective mucous coating overlying
the epithelial cells, which are sealed together by tight junctions. Together the mucous and
epithelial cells block the passage of most macromolecules. This is supported by an immunologic response of secretory IgA from the plasma cells in the lamina propria. Secretory
IgA binds antigens and removes them in the intestinal mucus or, for those antigens that
pass through the intestinal barrier, secretory IgA binds antigen and is removed from the
circulation through the liver and bile. 489, 504. 505, 523 Antigens bypassing these protective
mechanisms stimulate an immune response which, for many molecules, results in tolerance or anergy by activation of suppressor (CD8) T cells or suppressor cytokine profiles
(such as IL-4, IL-IO, and TGF-f3) from Th2 and Th3 cells.489 Abnormalities in the barrier
or immune response may result in sensitization. Therefore, damage to the normal defense
barriers along with ingestion of food molecules at the same time most likely contributes to
which molecules become antigenic.
The type of molecule also plays a role because most food hypersensitivity reactions
are directed against complex glycoproteins. The protection is delayed in human infants
because, in the first month of life, there is predominantly an IgM response, which is not
as effective as secretory IgA in trapping and removing antigens. 523 Children have immature intestinal mucosal barriers that are less efficient in handling and processing food
proteins.F"
Despite these defenses, an immunologic response to a variety of food antigens often
occurs both in normal individuals and those with proven food hypersensitivity.s'< 505, 523 In
rodents, it has been shown that antigen-presenting cells in the mononuclear phagocytic
system stimulate gut CD8+ T cells that play a role in the development of immune
tolerance; if overloaded with multiple antigens, this may prevent the induction of tolerance to subsequent exposed antigens. This observation has led to the suggestion that, if a
similar mechanism occurred in human infants, the observation of increased incidence of
food hypersensitivity in 4-month-old human infants fed a variety of solids foods could be
explained.P"
Another consideration in animals, in which gastrointestinal parasitism and viral enteritis are relatively common, is that a damaged intestinal tract allows the bypassing of the
normal defense mechanisms and antigens would overload the gut mononuclear phagocytic
system. The predisposition to develop IgE antibody may be enhanced by a concurrent
parasitic infection.P This has been shown experimentally wherein endoparasites favor the
development of IgE to orally administered allergens in atopy-prone dogs495 and in cats.531
Poor digeStion results in larger protein molecules and, because food hypersensitivity to
small proteins and amino acids is rare, these may be more capable of inducing a hypersensitivity reaction.P'
Additionally, because endoparasitism and viral enteritis occur in young dogs and food
hypersensitivity often develops in young dogs, it becomes a tempting hypothesis that
needs to be studied. Attention has also been focused on a heterogeneous group of
cytokines called histamine-releasing factors.v- 504, 505 After being initially generated by

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 617
chronic antigenic exposures, these cytokines can cause histamine release in the absence of
the provoking antigen, and this release can continue for some time after the antigen is
removed. Such a mechanism could explain the long delay (10 to 13 weeks) reported
between the initiation of a hypoallergenic diet and clinical improvement in some foodhypersensitive dogs. This mechanism is also thought to playa role in cutaneous hyperirritability with chronic ingestion of the offending food allergens.F"
Highly inbred, high IgE-producing atopic Spaniel-Basenji colony dogs were immunized subcutaneously with food antigen extracts in alum. 495 The dogs then experienced
clinical manifestations of food hypersensitivity after oral challenge with the foods. However, these dogs experienced only gastrointestinal signs.
Compared with what is known in humans, little is known about the food allergens
that are important in small animals. Most commonly, the allergen is a water-soluble
glycoprotein present in the food, and this glycoprotein may become recognizable only
after digestion or heating and preparation of the food. The size of the allergenic glycoproteins in humans is generally large, with a molecular weight greater than 12,000 daltons.
This has not been confirmed in the dog. A company report of nine food-hypersensitive
dogs described reactions to allergens most likely with molecular weights greater than 1400
daltons in casein, fish, and egg. 487 In the three casein-hypersensitive dogs, the offending
allergen was determined to have a molecular weight between 1100 and 4500 daltons. This
determination was based on patients reacting to a diet containing a hydrolysate with 98%
of the proteins being less than 4500 daltons but not to a casein hydrolysate with 99.7% of
the proteins being less than 1100 daltons.
In another study, a low-molecular-weight hydrolyzed diet was used to diagnose food
hypersensitivity in 69% of 29 suspected food-hypersensitive dogs. 5°O Rosser challenged 7
food-hypersensitive dogs with a hydrolyzed diet in which 98.8% of the proteins were
smaller than 1400 daltons-with no exacerbations.f"
The documentation of a hypersensitive mechanism is rarely confirmed in the dog.
Food intolerance is also likely in the dog and may mimic food hypersensitivity reactions.
In humans, food intolerance is thought to account for the majority of adverse food
reactions, though their importance in cutaneous diseases has not been studied in depth.
We are beginning to acquire information on the dietary items responsible for food
hypersensitivity in dogs, though studies are still limited in size or scope of items challenged. Good studies are difficult because few owners are willing to separate a diet into
its components and to feed each item individually to identify the responsible allergen. In
addition, challenges are open and, in humans, the placebo effect has been shown to be
very high when attempting to determine dietary allergens. Therefore, documentation is
based on three positive double-blinded, placebo-controlled food challenges. 523 In vitro
(serologic) test results cannot be relied on to detect allergens that cause hypersensitivity
because they are positive in most normal dogs and in most dogs with other skin diseases.P? These test results are also positive in most dogs with proven hypersensitivity to
food, but not to the important allergens as determined by test meal investigations.F?
The largest prospective study to date evaluated 25 food-hypersensitive dogs with
seven different diet Ingredients.P" The challenge was to a standard group of dietary
ingredients (beef, chicken, chicken eggs, cow milk, wheat, soy, com) and not necessarily
to all the ingredients the dog had been eating prior to the diagnosis. Eighty percent of the
dogs reacted to one or two, and 64% of the dogs reacted to two or more, of these seven
foods, and the mean number of reactions in all dogs was 2.4. No dogs reacted to more
than five proteins, but we have seen a few cases that reacted to numerous proteins, and
one of us (C.KG.) had a patient that, over a 2-year period, experienced hypersensitivity
reactions to virtually every protein it was fed and ended up malnourished until treated
with corticosteriods and fed the foods it was hypersensitive to.
In another study, one dog was hypersensitive to nine food items. 516 Beef was the most
common reactant (60% of the dogs), but reactions were also detected with soy (32%),
chicken (28%), milk (28%), com (25%), wheat (24%), and eggs (20%).509 This is similar to
other reports that show that, in general, the most common offending foods are those most
commonly found in the diets being fed: beef, dairy products, chicken, milk, wheat,

618 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

chicken eggs, corn, and soy.488, 491. 496, 506, 509, 516, 526, 529 Interestingly, 9% of the dogs in one
study reacted to a rice product."
Another study also found that 50% of eight food-allergic dogs reacted to fish (herring
and catfish).524 We have also seen a few cases with well-documented reactions to potato, a
concern with the move toward potato-based hypoallergenic diets. It should also be realized that most cases do not get challenged with more than a few ingredients, and many
foods are not routinely tested in provocative challenge. Table 8-22 lists dietary items
reported to have caused food hypersensitivity in dogs. Though food additives (including
preservatives) are often blamed by the public (particularly by naturalists), these substances
are rarely documented to cause food hypersensitivity in dogs. One dog was documented to
react to the additive gum carrageenan.F"

CLINICAL FEATURES
It has been estimated that food hypersensitivity accounts for (1) as many as 1% of all
canine and feline dermatoses in a general practice and (2) about 10% of all canine allergic
skin diseases (excluding parasitic allergy).6I, 67., 488, 492 Studies have indicated that food
hypersensitivity in dogs and cats accounted for about 5% of all skin diseases and 15% of
the allergic dermatoses.w- 493 Food hypersensitivity is the third most common hypersensitivity skin disease in dogs after flea bite hypersensitivity and atopy.
The actual incidence is difficult to determine because food hypersensitivity often
occurs concurrently with other allergic diseases and symptoms may ameliorate or become
clinically acceptable when the concurrent allergy is controlled. In contrast, the other
allergy may be clinically irrelevant when the food hypersensitivity is controlled-thus, the
incidence reported may depend on the diagnostic approach selected by the clinician or
investigator. Concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity or atopic disease occurs in up to 75% of
cases.t'": 516, 517, 520, 529 Because many clients do not complete an adequate elimination diet,
some cases go unrecognized.
No age or sex predilections have been documented for canine food hypersensitivity.
Though there is no age predilection, it is important to note that many cases occur in
young dogs. In four studies, between 33% and 52%, respectively, of the food hypersensitive dogs experienced clinical signs at 1 year of age or less. 493, 506, 517, 529 The index of
suspicion for food hypersensitivity is above that of atopic disease when pruritus occurs in
dogs under 6 months of age. 67., 506, 517 Most investigators have not found a breed predilection. 69, 491, 528 Other investigators, however, found that American Cocker spaniels, English Springer spaniels, Labrador retrievers, Collies, Miniature schnauzers, Chinese Shar
Peis, Poodles, West Highland white terriers, Wheaten terriers, Boxers, Dachshunds,
Dalmatians, Lhasa apsos, German shepherds, and Golden retrievers were at increased
risk.493, 506, 517, 529
Food hypersensitivity can cause a wide variety of lesions and can be considered in any
nonseasonal pruritic dog. 67., 491, 492, 0513, 529 However, it is also important to recognize that

• Table 8-22

DIETARY ITEMS THAT HAVE CAUSED FOOD
HYPERSENSITIVITY IN THE DOG

Artificial food additives (gum carrageenan)
Beef
Canned foods
Chicken
Com
Cow's milk
Dairy products (whey)
Dog biscuits
Dog foods (including prescription canned and dry did)

Eggs
Fish (variety)
Food preservatives

Horse meat
Kidney beans
Lamb and mutton
Oatmeal
Pasta
Pork
Potatoes
Rabbit
Rice flour and rice
Soy
Turkey
Wheat

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 619

food hypersensitivity may be episodic or seasonal, such as when offending food items are
given sporadically or when perennial food hypersensitivity symptoms are minimal but
aggravated to a clinically significant level with concurrent seasonal atopic disease.v- 67., 496
Pruritus, with or without a primary eruption, is the only consistent finding. There is no
classic set of cutaneous signs pathognomonic for food hypersensitivity in the dog. A variety
of primary and secondary skin lesions are noted. These include papules, plaques, pustules,
wheals, angioedema, erythema, ulcers, excoriation, lichenification, pigment changes, alopecia, scales, crusts, and moist erosions that appear as areas of pyotraumatic dermatitis (Fig,
8-12A; see Fig. 8-8G). Eosinophilic vasculitis presenting as urticaria, or any lesions of
vasculitis, have been reported and seen by us in association with food hypersensitivity (see
Fig.8-8H).163
In general, the major complaint is pruritus, and the pruritus is nonseasonal and may
be poorly responsive to glucocorticoids, though a favorable response should not decrease
one's index of suspicion. If the offending food is a snack or table food, the signs can be
episodic, depending on how often the dog eats it. Any distribution of skin involvement
may occur, but the ears, rump, distal limbs, axillae, and groin appear commonly affected. 493. 506, 513, 517, 529 In some dogs, disease is limited to the ears or rump area. 496, 506, 517, 529
Pruritic, bilateral otitis extema (frequently with secondary bacterial or Malassezia
infections), along with secondary seborrheic skin disease, bacterial pyoderma, or both are
common in conjunction with food hypersensitivity.w- 493, 496, 506, 517, 529 Secondary bacterial
pyodermas most commonly present as superficial folliculitis, though folliculitis and furunculosis as well as bacterial pododermatitis or acral lick dermatitis may occur. Some dogs
present with only a recurrent bacterial pyoderma, with or without pruritus, wherein all
clinical signs resolve with antibiotic therapy.506, 529 Concurrent gastrointestinal disturbances
(vomiting, diarrhea, colic) have been reported in 10% to 15% of these dogs. 61, 67., 496, 529
In experimentally induced food hypersensitivity, the most common abnormality was an
increase in the number of bowel movements. When food-hypersensitive dogs were fed
diets containing the offending allergen, they averaged about three bowel movements per
day, versus 1.5 bowel movements per day when fed an allergen-free diet. One of us
(C.E.G.) has observed that pruritic dogs with more than three bowel movements per day
are more likely to have food hypersensitivities as part of the reason for their pruritus. In
one study, 60% of the food-hypersensitive dogs with cutaneous and gastrointestinal signs
defecated greater than or equal to six times a day.516 In humans, the noncutaneous
symptoms associated with food hypersensitivity are numerous ("tension-fatigue syndrome"), and malaise and dullness have been observed in dogs.67., 529
Seizures have been rarely described as being responsive to hypoallergenic diets. 67., ,529
Rosser had two dogs with a seizure history in his 51 food-hypersensitive dogs, and we
have seen seizures associated with food hypersensitivity.P!" It is interesting to note that
well-documented upper and lower respiratory symptoms occur in humans with doubleblinded, placebo-controlled food challenges, and this is not reported in veterinary
texts. 61, 67., 512, 523 This lack of recognition may reflect that the presence of respiratory
symptoms has been a feature that strongly suggested atopic disease, and may have thus
decreased an appropriate pursuit of food hypersensitivity in those dogs.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of canine food hypersensitivity consists of atopy, drug reaction,
flea bite hypersensitivity, pediculosis, intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, scabies, Malassezia dermatitis, seborrheic skin disease, and bacterial folliculitis.
At present, the definitive diagnosis of food hypersensitivity in dogs is reliable only on
the basis of elimination diets and provocative exposure testing. The necessary duration of
a hypoallergenic diet is controversial.v" ,529 A 21-day protocol would have diagnosed only
26% of the food-hypersensitive dogs in Rosser's prospective study.517 Studies have indicated that complete resolution or maximal improvement of clinical signs may require use
of a hypoallergenic diet for 10 to 13 weeks. 493, 517 However, two of us (D.W.S. and
W.H,M.) and others496 believe that a significant degree of improvement should occur

620 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-12. A, Erythema and alopecia over the lateral thighs of a dog with food hypersensitivity. B,
Hypotrichosis of trunk and rump due to hair pulling in a cat with food hypersensitivity. C, Feline food hypersensitivity due to milk. Severe excoriation of the preauricular area. D, Feline food hypersensitivity due to fish. Severe
excoriation of the neck. E, Chronic flea bite hypersensitivity in a Pekingese, showing alopecia, hyperpigmentation,
and lichenification on the lower back and tail base. F, Canine flea bite hypersensitivity. After many seasons of
affliction, areas of the lower back and tail become hairless, thickened, gray, and folded. G, Feline flea bite
hypersensitivity. The individual miliary lesions are shallow excoriations covered with a small brown crust. Some
crusts have been removed to show the lesion's base. H, Feline flea bite hypersensitivity. Numerous miliary lesions
clustered on the back of a cat. Area has been clipped to expose lesions.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 621

within 4 to 6 weeks, though maximum improvement may take 10 to 13 weeks. In another
study of 20 dogs, 95% of dogs improved within 3 weeks or less.50o
Hypoallergenic diets must be individualized for each patient on the basis of careful
dietary history. However, hidden antigens must also be considered because some canned
fish in water contain other proteins, such as vegetable and whey proteins present in
canned tuna and hot dogs.61 The objectives of the diet are (1) to feed the animals dietary
substances that they are not commonly exposed to and (2) to feed the animals a diet that
is free of additives (colorings, flavorings, preservatives). Switching from one commercial
diet to another, or using commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets, is often not satisfactory. Frequently used components of a hypoallergenic diet include lamb, filleted whitefish, canned tuna fish in water, rabbit, venison, turkey, rice, potatoes, ostrich, yams, and
pinto beans, depending on the dietary history.F« 488. 499, 528 These diets are usually not
adequately balanced and, in young growing dogs, should not be fed without supplements. 522 Because the calcium content of such diets is particularly low, a nondairy calcium
source as well as vitamins and essential fatty acids, at the minimum, should be added to
the diet.
An alternative protocol, though not as accurate as feeding a carefully selected homeprepared diet, is to feed a commercially prepared, limited, and novel protein source diet.
It has been suggested that one reason these commercial diets may not be as effective as
home-prepared diets is contamination from processing in equipment used to make other
foods. 490 Another concern is that the source of animal fats added to many of these diets
could be contaminated with animal proteins other than those in the limited protein
source. In young dogs, this may be preferred until they are older than 10 to 12 months,
when the risks of a nonbalanced diet would be less.
A variety of limited and novel protein diets are now being manufactured by several
companies, and they are very attractive because they are convenient and nutritionally
complete.v" lams offers a fish and potato diet (Response flp) as well as a kangaroo and
oats diet (Response k/o). Innovative Veterinary Diets (IVD) offers a potato-based food
with several novel proteins available, such as duck, lamb, venison, or rabbit; Waltham
offers chicken and rice limited protein diets, and Master Foods offers a capelin (a type of
fish in the salmon family) and tapioca dog food. Hills Pet Products Science Diets offer
rice with egg, lamb, salmon, or duck dry dog foods.
New foods are constantly being produced, and the practitioner should intermittently
check dog food companies at meetings, by telephone, or via their websites. It is critical,
however, to understand that the reliability of these commercially prepared diets has either
not been confirmed (the usual situation) or confirmed in limited trials in known foodhypersensitive dogs. Only a few studies have looked at the efficacy of some of these
limited protein dog foods and, to date, none of the diets is 100% effective.
When known food-hypersensitive dogs were fed canned did (lamb and rice) or dry
did (egg and rice) manufactured by Hill's Pet Products, 15% to 25% became pruritic
again. 508 , 520, 528 A study with a fish and potato diet (Response f/p, lams) indicated that
50% of the previously confirmed food-hypersensitive dogs were more pruritic on this diet,
and in 25% of the dogs the worsening of the clinical signs was confirmed to be due to the
fish.524 Capelin and tapioca (Pedigree canine selected protein 3, Master Food, Austria) was
effective in 93.7% of food-hypersensitive dogs. 525 The differences in fish-based diets may
reflect that, in humans, fish hypersensitivity may be limited to certain families or even
species of fish.523
The commercial diets vary in the number of proteins as well as in their digestibility,
and it has been recommended that diets with high digestibility be used. 521 Complete
digestion results in the production of free amino acids and small peptides, which are
probably poorer antigens. 521 Newer "hypoallergenic" diets have been formulated utilizing
hydrolyzed proteins in an attempt to supply an adequate protein source that will not be
capable of stimulating a food hypersensitivity. Exclude Veterinary Exclusion Diet (DVM
Pharmaceuticals) utilizes hydrolyzed liver and casein and novel carbohydrate sources of
pinto beans and oat groats; and CNM-HA (Purina) utilizes hydrolyzed soybean protein
and com starch so that the carbohydrate source will also have limited antigenicity. Though

622 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
limited studies by the companies that have developed these diets suggest they may be
beneficial, further independent work is needed. It has been suggested that the size of
allergenic proteins in dogs may be smaller than it is in humans.
Feeding a strict diet is critical, and the dog's owner must be counseled to allow
nothing but water and the limited diet to enter the dog's mouth. We see many referred
dogs whose owners have become frustrated because they think that food hypersensitivity
has been ruled out. However, on closer questioning, it is often determined that the dog is
still eating the offending foods. The dogs may still be receiving treats such as rawhide
chewies, flavored dietary supplements or medicines, or medication in food, such as cheese
or a piece of hot dog. It must be remembered that medicines and supplements in gelatin
(parts and pieces of cattle, swine, or horses) capsules must be withheld during the dietary
trial. It is also important that the possibility of eating items while outside is eliminated and
that all family members follow the diet guidelines.
Following a strict diet may be very difficult or impossible for some owners. In one
study, 37% of owners that had been thoroughly counseled and thought they could provide
an appropriate home-cooked diet dropped out prior to finishing the 8-week trial. 524 The
major clinical sign being evaluated during the elimination diet is the pruritus. The level of
pruritus should markedly decrease, but this may be gradual and may take 4 to 8 weeks to
become evident. Because up to 75% of food-hypersensitive dogs have other concurrent
hypersensitivities (especially atopy or flea bite hypersensitivity), the response to a hypoallergenic diet may be partial (for instance, 50% reduction in prurituS).491, 49,1, 506, 513, 520 In
other dogs, the pruritus may only decreased 25% to 50%, but the pattern of the pruritus
may change. 499 The diagnosis is then highly suspected by feeding the animal its normal
diet and seeing the dermatosis exacerbate in 10 to 14 days.497, 506, 517
In our experience, most well-documented cases of canine food hypersensitivity with
multiple positive challenges have a recurrence of pruritus within 3 to 7 days. Rapid
recurrences, though not given in days, were typical in another study.509 POSSibly, the cases
requiring longer challenges represent food intolerance, which may be more dose related.
As soon as an exacerbation is noted, the offending diet is discontinued. It is also important
to then feed the hypoallergenic diet again, without any other therapeutic changes, and to
see the lesions again resolve, confirming the diagnosis of food hypersensitivity, In general,
dogs that experienced exacerbation within 2 days will only have to be back on the
hypo allergenic diet a few days to again see the lesions or pruritus resolve. In humans,
three positive challenges that are double-blinded and placebo-controlled are required to
definitively document a food reaction because there is a significant placebo effect. 523
When home-cooked diets are used, dogs may lose weight, be hungry, and experience
a dull hair coat and scaly skin. Secondary infections must be controlled or response to the
diet cannot be evaluated. Some dogs may experience new dietary sensitivities within 1 to
3 years.496. 529
Routine laboratory tests are not useful in diagnosing canine food hypersensitivity.
Blood eosinophilia is rare in the dog. 61, 67a, 488 Prick, scratch, intradermal, and serologic
(RAST, ELISA, VARL) tests with food allergens in dogs with food hypersensitivity are
very inaccurate.s'< 497, 508. 511, 514, 527 In one study, about 75% of all normal dogs, dogs with
various dermatoses, and dogs with food hypersensitivity experienced positive serologic
(RAST, ELISA) test results for one or more foods. 527 Hence, serologic tests have a high
sensitivity but a very low specificity. A monoclonal IgE ELISA (CMG Immunodot) was
evaluated in proven food-hypersensitive dogs and yielded negative results in all instances,
yielding a sensitivity of 0% and a positive predictive value of 0%.514
The lack of utility of these tests may reflect (1) different immunologic mechanisms at
play (serologic tests only evaluate type I hypersensitivity) or (2) testing with inappropriate
antigens (processing and digestion). One group of investigators was unable to demonstrate
antigen-specific IgE antibodies in the serum of proven food-hypersensitive dogs using the
P-K and oral P-K tests. 507 Numerous factors may influence the applicability of whole food
extracts for skin testing and serologic testing, including the effects of cooking, processing,
digestion, metabolism, additives, and contaminants on the original whole food substance.
Gastroscopic food sensitivity testing has been described.P" 503, 515 This modality would be

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 623

inconvenient for routine clinical use, and further studies need to be conducted to determine its usefulness. The basophil degranulation test has also shown some promise for the
diagnosis of food hypersensitivity, but larger, controlled studies are needed. 57. 58 This test
is not currently available in the United States, requires rapid and special handling of
blood, is very labor intensive, and is unlikely ever to be more than a research tool. New
techniques may make this type of testing more available in the future.
Histopathology

Skin biopsy reflects the variability of the gross morphology of skin lesions. It is usually
characterized by varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), with mononuclear cells or neutrophils usually predominating (Fig.
8-13A).28, 67a, 83 Histopathologic changes consistent with secondary bacterial pyoderma,
Malassezia dermatitis, or both of these are common. Occasionally, eosinophils are present,
and an eosinophilic vasculitis may also occur in rare cases.l'" One dog with food hypersensitivity demonstrated an epitheliotropic lymphocytic infiltrate that mimicked epitheliotropic
lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) immunophenotypically.f" This confirms the variability that
may occur histologically as well as clinically and emphasizes the need for a hypoallergenic
trial prior to making a diagnosis of epitheliotropic lymphoma.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for food hypersensitivity is usually good. Therapy consists of avoiding
offending foods or using systemic antipruritic agents. Once a hypoallergenic diet has been
effective and challenge has confirmed the diagnosis, most clients will want to switch to a
limited novel protein commercial diet. In general, we prefer provocative exposure testing
to determine which ingredients are responsible. This allows the pet to eat a more varied
diet in the future.
Hypoallergenic diets are formulated by adding single foodstuffs to the diet, one at a
time, and evaluating each item for 10 to 14 days. In this way, a tolerable, varied diet can

FIGURE 8-13. A, Canine food hypersensitivity (beef).
Predominantly lymphocytic superficial perivascular dermatitis.
B, Canine flea bite hypersensitivity. Epidermal eosinophilic
microabscess.

624 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
usually be achieved over the course of 4 to 6 months. Such diets need to be balanced
with vitamin, mineral, and fatty acid supplements prior to this prolonged challenge.
Nonflavored, animal and vegetable protein-free vitamin supplements should be added, as
well as calcium.V' If the protein fraction is equal in quantity to the carbohydrate fraction,
then calcium carbonate (2 g for 15 kg/day) may be used. As a compromise, animals can be
"provoked" daily, for 10 to 14 days at a time, by being fed each of the major food items
reported to cause food hypersensitivity in dogs (beef, dairy products, wheat, soy, com,
chicken, egg) to determine whether one or more of these items exacerbates the condition. 488. 506. 509 On the basis of information obtained from this provocation, a commercial
food that does not contain the offending substance(s) can usually be selected. About 20%
of food-hypersensitive dogs, however, cannot consume any commercial diet and must be
maintained on a home-prepared diet. 493, 513. 517. 528 Occasionally, animals experience further
dietary hypersensitivities and require re-evaluation by elimination diets and test meal
investigations.
When hypoallergenic diets are not feasible, systemic glucocorticoids and/or antihistamines may be used to suppress clinical signs. Food hypersensitivity, however, may be
difficult to control with these drugs. A complete response to systemic glucocorticoids
occurs in only 50% of food-hypersensitive dogs. 491. 493. 506. 517

Feline Food Hypersensitivity
Feline food hypersensitivity (food allergy, food intolerance) is a nonseasonal pruritic skin
disorder of cats that has been described for many years."- 67a. 501 This condition is described as both uncommon and the third most common hypersensitivity in the cat. The
reported incidence ranges from 1% to 6% of all feline dermatoses.Pv 491, 493 It has also
been described as being relatively more common in cats than in dogs.512 A report of 34
cats with the cutaneous reaction patterns of miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma
complex, and self-induced alopecia indicated that food hypersensitivity was the second
most common cause, accounting for 17% of cases.420 Flea bite hypersensitivity was diagnosed in 70% and atopy in 13% of the cats, respectively. In a prospective study of 25 cats
recruited from referring veterinarians for suspicion of food hypersensitivity, 20 completed
a diet trial and provocation and none was found to respond to a restricted protein
(chicken and rice) commercial diet trial. 439 Additionally, 14 of these cats underwent
intestinal permeability measurement and 13 were normal. Thirty five percent had flea bite
hypersensitivity alone, and 35% had concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity and atopy. In
another prospective evaluation of 61 pruritic cats and 12 cats with pruritus and vomiting
or diarrhea, food hypersensitivity was pursued using diet trials with rice and chicken or
venison and rice, as well as provocative exposure.P" Food hypersensitivity was confirmed
in 16% of the pruritic cats and in 42% of the pruritic cats with concurrent gastrointestinal
signs. Such conflicting results suggest that further studies are warranted to determine the
prevalence of these diseases.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
A type I hypersensitivity has been documented to occur in the cat. 526 The same report,
however, also showed that IgG may also have been involved in the pathogenesis. It has
also been shown that endoparasitism in cats with Toxocara caii at the time of oral antigen
challenge increases the production of allergen-specific IgE.531 There also is the induction
of IgG and IgA. The presence of concurrent flea bite hypersensitivity, atopy, contact
hypersensitivity, or a combination of them suggests that a predisposition to allergies of any
type may be a factor.f": 512, 517 It additionally suggests that the mechanism may involve
more than a type I hypersensitivity because the associated diseases vary in their allergic
mechanism.
In most clinical cases, the pathomechanism is not determined and, in fact, only the
association between diet and pruritus or dermatitis is established. Food intolerance, as
discussed in the dog, may also playa role in the pathogenesis. Very little controlled work

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 625
• Table 8-23

SUBSTANCES REPORTED TO HAVE CAUSED
FOOD HYPERSENSITIVITY IN THE CAT

Dairy products (milk, cheese)
Fish
Beef
Pork
Chicken
Rabbit
Horse meat

Lamb and mutton

Eggs
All commercial foods (various proteins, as well as preservatives and dyes)
Clam juice
Cod liver oil
Benzoic acid

has been done regarding the offending allergens or materials in the diets that result in the
dermatitis. In two studies, provocative exposure testing showed fish, beef, and dairy
products to be the most common allergens. 532. 538 In two studies, about 30% of the foodhypersensitive cats were unable to eat any commercially prepared diet without experiencing pruritus and dermatitis. 535, 538 Other studies have strongly implicated even such things
as clam juice and lamb baby food. 491, 526, 534, 535 The frequent use and ready availability of
commercial diets that contain lamb or other unusual protein sources is likely to induce
some allergic reactions and make selecting a test diet more difficult. We and others534
have seen cats present with or experience food hypersensitivity to lamb, both homecooked and that found in commercial products. Table 8-23 lists all the foods currently
reported to have caused food hypersensitivity in the cat.

CLINICAL FEATURES
The mean age of onset of feline food hypersensitivity is 4 to 5 years, with no age
predilection documented. In one study, however, 46% of the cats experienced the disease
by 2 years of age. 535 Siamese or Siamese cross cats may be at risk because they accounted
for 30% of the cases in two studies.w- 535 and in one study such cats had a relative risk
factor of 5.0. 535 No sex predilection has been documented.
The most consistent clinical finding is pruritus, which is present in 100% of such
cases. The pruritus is typically nonseasonal. Some cat owners like to rotate the commercial
diets fed to their cats so as to provide variety, however. This practice can result in an
irregularly recurrent pruritic dermatosis. Pruritus most commonly involves the face (see
Fig. 8-12C), head, pinnae, and neck (see Fig. 8-12D), or combinations of these."
Generalized pruritus may also occur. 3D, 61, 67a, 512 The other common cutaneous reaction
patterns are self-induced alopecia (see Fig. 8-12B), miliary dermatitis, and eosinophilic
granuloma complex lesions. Some cats develop an exfoliative dermatitis characterized
histologically by a lymphocytic mural folliculitis (see Chap. 11). Rarely, cats manifest an
erythematous papulopustular eruption characterized clinicopathologically as a sterile eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis.Pv 455 Other reported nonpruritic signs are angioedema,
urticaria, and conjunctivitis.t" 535 Gastrointestinal (usually diarrhea but also vomiting) disease is present in 10% to 15% of cases.v- 67a, 532 In a prospective study of 73 pruritic cats,
33% of the food hypersensitive cats had concurrent gastrointestinal signs.533
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic colitis may be a manifestation of food hypersensitivity in
cats. 53DIn one cat with abdominal alopecia from excessive grooming and chronic diarrhea,
alimentary lymphosarcoma was diagnosed on two occasions from biopsy taken by duodenoscopy, but the cat responded to an elimination diet. 537 Sneezing, malaise, and dullness
have been reported.?! 67a, 491 Peripheral lymphadenopathy, which can be quite marked,
may be present.v" Up to 25% of food-hypersensitive cats have other concurrent hypersensitivities, especially atopy or flea bite hypersensitivity.491,535 These multiple hypersensitivities can greatly complicate the diagnostic work-up. About 50% of food-hypersensitive cats
do not completely respond to systemic glucocorticoids. 491, 493, 535

·See references 492, 493, 513, 532, 535, 538, 539.

626 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis varies according to the clinical presentation. The most common
alternatives are atopy, flea bite hypersensitivity, psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis, dermatophytosis, otodectic mange, cheyletiellosis, and notoedric mange. The diagnosis is
suggested by using an elimination diet trial that results in a significant reduction in the
clinical signs. The diagnosis is confirmed if clinical signs recur when the cat is fed its
previous diet.
Hypoallergenic diets must be individualized for each cat according to previous dietary
history. Some common favorites are lamb or ham baby food, ham, ostrich, ground rabbit,
lobster, and venison. One of these may be fed alone or mixed in a blender with potato or
rice. Studies have shown that these diets are not nutritionally balanced, and feeding them
to young growing animals could lead to a deficiency disease. 522 Therefore, it may be
prudent to recommend that the diet be at least supplemented with taurine tablets,
calcium tablets (dicalcium phosphate), safflower oil, and a multiple vitamin that does not
contain additives.
Commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets are not reliable. In some cases, however, such a diet is all the client will agree to try. In these cases, a canned diet may be
more preferable to dry diets because there are less preservatives.w? These diets also
appear to be more palatable to cats. Examples of canned diets for cats include lamb with
carbohydrates diets (Hills prescription did, rice; Innovative Veterinary Diet, potato; lams
response formula lib, barley; Wysong, rice and quinoa), Innovative Veterinary Diets also
make potato with venison or rabbit. Dry cat foods similar to most of the canned diets may
be found. In these instances, the client should be told that negative results do not rule
out the possibility of food hypersensitivity and that a diet with totally different ingredients
from the eat's previous diet should be used.
The number of commercially prepared "hypoallergenic" diets is increasing daily, or so
it seems. 492 It is essential to remember that, with very few exceptions, these diets have not
been scientifically evaluated in confirmed food-hypersensitive cats. To our knowledge, only
two commercial diets have been evaluated in cats-canned did for dogs and feline did,
manufactured by Hill's Pet Products-and about 20% of the cats became pruritic and
dermatitic while consuming these products.535.538 A capelin (fish) and tapioca dry cat food
was also evaluated and was effective in three of three cats. 525 However, this diet is not
very palatable to cats. A chicken and rice diet failed to document food hypersensitivity in
any of 20 cats with compatible clinical signs. 439 Baby foods have often been used as
hypoallergenic foods. 57a However, baby foods with added onion powder are to be avoided
because they can induce Heinz body anemia in cats. 510 In many cases, to adequately
perform the dietary trial, the cat may have to remain completely indoors.P-" Studies have
shown that the previously recommended 3-week dietary trial is not adequate.w- 493, ,535
Improvement may occur rapidly, gradually, or late, but the diet should be continued for 9
to 13 weeks so that maximum response is achieved. Cats that have concurrent atopy or
flea bite hypersensitivity show a partial response. To confirm the diagnosis, the cat is then
fed its former diet for 10 to 14 days to see whether the pruritus or dermatitis is
reproduced.493.535
Intradermal allergy testing and serologic tests are thought to suffer from the same
problems as discussed for canine food hypersensitivity-that is to say, they are worthless!
Histopathology

Skin biopsy is not diagnostic but is especially useful for ruling out other diagnostic
possibilities.t" 57a, 83. 455 The histopathologic findings are quite variable, as are the clinical
lesions (see Feline Atopy). The most common reaction pattern is a superficial or deep
perivascular dermatitis wherein eosinophils are the dominant inflammatory cell. 455 Some
cases lack eosinophils, whereas others are primarily composed of a dense infiltrate of mast
cells that may be misinterpreted as mast cell neoplasia." Eosinophilic folliculitis and
furunculosis occasionally is a feature of feline food hypersensitivity.s" 455 Biopsy specimens

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 627
from eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions show the typical histopathologic findings for
those lesions (see Chap. 18). Some cats have a lymphocytic mural folliculitis (see Chap.
11).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The optimal treatment for feline food hypersensitivity is the avoidance of the offending
allergen(s). This is best accomplished by feeding a limited protein source commercial diet,
alleviating the problem of having to balance a home-prepared diet. Examples of limitedprotein diets are Feline did (Hill's Pet Products); the Innovative potato-based diets with
rabbit, lamb, duck, and venison; Waltham's limited protein diets with capelin and tapioca,
or chicken and rice; chicken formula cat food (lams). Fortunately, the pet food industry
has been responding to this problem by developing new diets with atypical protein sources
in them. About 30% of food-hypersensitive cats, however, cannot be successfully managed
with any commercially prepared diet. 535 It is especially important that a home-prepared
diet to be fed in the long term be balanced and, at the minimum, supplemented with
calcium, taurine, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals. The supplements required
depend on the diet, and consultation with a nutrition text or nutritionist may be necessary.
A hypersensitivity to a component of the new diet may develop.F" and it has been
suggested that this development is more common in cats than dogs. 512 One of us (C.KG.)
has seen a cat that experienced new allergies to three consecutive diets over 2 years, at
which point the client elected to treat with glucocorticoids for the long term. In other
situations, avoidance is impossible because the cat is outdoors and finds other sources of
allergenic substances to eat. In these cases, systemic glucocorticoids, antihistamines, or
fatty acids may be used (see Chap. 3). The efficacy of antihistamines and fatty acids for
the management of food-hypersensitive cats has not been reported. In cases that require
high levels of systemic glucocorticoids or that do not respond to them, however, antihistamines and fatty acids may have a beneficial effect.

Parasitic Hypersensitivity
Parasites are known to be potent inducers of IgE and often elicit an eosinophilic response.w 30 Therefore, it is not surprising that they commonly induce hypersensitivity
reactions in dogs and cats. Numerous ectoparasites of dogs and cats have types of
hypersensitivity as very important and integral parts of their pathogenesis. Most are
covered in this chapter, but one classic example of a parasite that creates most of its
disease as a result of hypersensitivity is scabies, covered in Chapter 6.

CANINE FLEA BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Flea bite hypersensitivity (flea allergy dermatitis) is a pruritic, papular dermatitis in dogs
that becomes sensitized to allergens produced by fleas. It is the most common hypersensitivity skin disorder of dogs in parts of the world where fleas are common. In one report
looking at the prevalence of fleas and flea hypersensitivity in the United Kingdom in
winter, fleas were found in 4.7% to 19.3% of the dogs, and the prevalence of flea bite
hypersensitivity ranged from 1.8% to 11.4%.570 This suggests that approximately half of
dogs with fleas experience flea bite hypersensitivity.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Flea saliva and whole flea extracts contain several potentially antigenic substances, including polypeptides, amino acids, aromatic compounds, and fluorescent materials. However,
very little flea salivary antigen is present in whole flea extract « 0.5% ).542, ,547 These
substances are complete antigens and not haptens as was previously described for the
guinea pig. Multiple studies have shown that at least 15 different antigens are

628 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
present." Gel filtration of flea saliva revealed that allergens were present in a highmolecular-weight fraction (about 4000 to 1,500,000 daltons) and in a highly fluorescent
aromatic fraction « 1000 daltons). Individual dogs may react to completely different
groups of allergens, though the most consistently reacting allergens appear in the range of
8 to 90 kD.t Only one salivary antigen-at 40 kD-was worthy of "major allergen"
designation, binding IgE from about 60% of the dogs. 549 It was also demonstrated that
Ctenocephalides felis felis, Pulex irritans, and Pulex simulans shared one or more antigens,
and that guinea pigs and human beings sensitized to one type of flea reacted to all
species. 67a
The newest breakthrough has been the development of a new technique for collecting
flea saliva and the subsequent studies with the saliva.547, 548 This led to the purification,
characterization, and cloning of a major flea salivary antigen as well as the use of this
antigen in intradermal skin testing, serologic testing, and immunotherapy.P'"- 548, 562, 566, 567
What still needs to be evaluated is whether any nonsalivary antigens are also important. If
they are and they do not cross-react, they would be missed.
Most dogs that are hypersensitive to flea saliva have immediate skin test reactions to
the intradermal injection of flea antigen, and these reactions correlate with clinical disease.
In one study, allergen-specific IgE to flea saliva correlated with clinical disease, but
allergen-specific IgG to flea saliva was very common in dogs and did not correlate with
clinical disease.P'" However, another study indicated that antiflea IgE and IgG levels were
similar in normal and flea-hypersensitive dogs. 568 One of the cat flea salivary antigens has
been cloned and has been designated Ctef1. 567 The genes have been cloned into Escherichia coli, and a recombinant source for pure allergen rCtefl is available (Heska Corporation). This allergen has been shown to be a major allergen in both experimentally
induced and naturally occurring flea bite hypersensitivity, with greater than 90% of such
dogs reacting. In addition, ELISA inhibition with the rCtefl allergen removes 90% of the
antiflea saliva IgE.
The orderly sequence of flea bite hypersensitivity that develops in guinea pigs does
not occur in dogs and cats,29, 30, 61, 67a and dogs and cats rarely, if ever, achieve natural
desensitization. 61, 67a Many flea-hypersensitive dogs also experience delayed skin test reactions to flea antigen, and up to 30% experience only a delayed reaction.v" 67a, 541 Whether
or not this is to the same salivary allergen that produces immediate reactions has not been
described. Biopsy specimens taken from skin lesions that are 4 to 18 hours old show
changes compatible with cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity, and specimens from lesions
that are 24 to 48 hours old show changes compatible with a delayed-type hypersensitivity
reaction.s" 5051, 5056 It has been suggested that late-phase IgE-mediated reactions are also
involved in canine flea bite hypersensttivity.P It is likely that animals do not experience
skin lesions as a result of flea infestation unless they are Hea-hypersensitive. Skin samples
from flea-hypersensitive dogs and normal dogs were tested for leukotriene C4 levels. s59
Sites tested were from normal-appearing skin that was a control site or injected with flea
antigen or bacterial lipopolysaccharide. Surprisingly, all three sites had Significantly less
leukotriene C4 in the Hea-hypersensitive dogs.
Studies of intradermal skin test reactions to flea antigen and of the serum levels of
antiflea IgE and IgG in flea-naive dogs, experimentally maintained dogs, as well as dogs
kept as pets or in animal shelters, with and without flea bite hypersensitivity, have
indicated that dogs continually exposed to fleas and flea-naive dogs have low antibody
levels and negative intradermal test reactions compared with flea-hypersensitive dogs.29, 30, 555
These observations suggest that continually exposed dogs may become partially or completely immunologically tolerant. Experimentally, intermittent flea exposure was shown to
induce both immediate and delayed intradermal reactions, and converting from intermittent to continuous exposure did not eliminate these reactions.P" 30, 0555 It has been sug-

'See references 29,30, 67a, 517, 549, 550, 556, 563, 564, 568.
tSee references 29, 547, 549, 550, 563, 564, 568.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 629

gested that, if a dog has an abundance of fleas and no evidence of a hypersensitivity reaction, it might be prudent to refrain from introducing a diligent flea-control program. 30, 67a
Whereas up to 40% of the normal dog population in flea-endemic areas may have
positive intradermal skin test reactions to flea antigen, up to 80% of the atopic dogs in the
same area may be positive.P 30 This finding suggests that the atopic state may predispose
dogs to flea bite hypersensitivity. In other studies, however, only 14% to 36% of atopic
dogs were also flea hypersensitive.P"- 541 This may partly relate to flea exposure because
one of us (C.E.G.) has looked at flea-positive incidence in atopic dogs in southern
California versus Las Vegas, a flea-free environment. Less than 10% of positive flea
reactions were found in the Nevada dogs, with most having history of traveling to flea
environments. In contrast, multiple surveys over years in the southern California dogs
have shown that more than 50% react positively to fleas, though not all of these dogs
prompted a clinical diagnosis of flea hypersensitivity.
Clinical Features

Most authors indicate that no breed or sex predilections are apparent. 6 1, 67a In a French
study, however, Setters, Fox terriers, Pekingese, spaniels, and Chow Chows were predisposed.'?' Although dogs may experience flea bite hypersensitivity at any age, it is rare for
clinical signs to develop in animals less than 6 months of age. The most common age of
onset is 3 to 5 years.
Canine flea bite hypersensitivity is characterized by a pruritic, papular dermatitiS.61, 67a, 541, 565 The flea bite induces a wheal or papule that persists for up to 72 hours.
Crusts may develop on the surface of the papules. Chronic pruritus may lead to alopecia,
lichenification, crusting, and hyperpigmentation. Lesions are typically confined to the
dorsal lumbosacral area, caudomedial thighs, ventral abdomen, and flanks (see Fig. 8-12E
and F). One study showed dorsal lumbar involvement in only 76% of flea-hypersensitive
dogs, but this was not a distinguishing feature because 39% of atopic dogs also had dorsal
lumbar involvement.P" This study showed that facial involvement also occurred in 34% of
the dogs with flea-bite hypersensitivity, but that paw disease was present in only 1.2% of
the dogs. Crusted papules in the umbilical area may be particularly suggestive of flea bite
hypersensitivity.
Generalized cutaneous signs may be present in severely hypersensitive animals. Pyotraumatic dermatitis ("hot spots"), secondary bacterial pyoderma, and secondary seborrhea are common in chronic cases. Owing to the constant, excessive chewing, some dogs
wear down their incisors. Fibropruritic nodules occasionally occur in chronic cases and are
usually present in the dorsal lumbar area (see Chap. 20).
The presence of otitis externa or pedal pruritus strongly suggests the presence of
another concurrent hypersensitivity, such as atopy or food hypersensitivlty.F" This has
been supported by two studies.P" 248 Flea bite hypersensitivity may be distinctly seasonal
(summer and fall) in areas of the world with cold winters, though one study showed that
disease may be present year round, even in these climates.F" In warm climates, or where
household infestation persists, flea bite hypersensitivity may be nonseasonal, although
clinical signs are still usually more severe in summer and fall.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes food hypersensitivity, atopy, drug reaction, pediculosis,
cheyletiellosis, intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, Malassezia dermatitis, and bacterial folliculitis.
Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, intradermal skin testing
with flea antigen, and response to therapy. The morphology and distribution of the skin
lesions are very suggestive. The presence of fleas or flea dirt is also a helpful, optimal
finding. It has also been suggested that a diagnosis requires evidence of fleas. 20 A recent
bath or dip or vigorous grooming, however, may eliminate the fleas and flea dirt. In fact,
15% of dogs with flea bite hypersensitivity do not have evidence of flea infestation (fleas,
flea excrement) at the time of examination.P'! In our opinion, not finding evidence of fleas

630 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
does not rule out the diagnosis, but it does cause one to question the diagnosis. More
importantly, the mere presence of fleas on a pruritic dog does not mean the animal has
flea bite hypersensitivity. In fact, the diagnosis of flea hypersensitivity does not preclude
the presence of another disease. When fleas consistently are not seen on flea-hypersensitive dogs and the client has performed adequate flea control, the persistence of pruritus
should prompt the clinician to look for a concurrent hypersensitivity such as atopy or food
hypersensitivity. Eosinophilia is often present.F"
• Allergy Testing. Intradermal testing is an excellent method to help confirm the
diagnosis of flea bite hypersensitivity. In the United States, one commercial aqueous flea
antigen (Flea Antigen, Greer Laboratories) has emerged as a very reliable product.P" 61, 67a
This product is injected intradermally (0.05 ml of 1: 1000 w/v aqueous solution), along
with positive (histamine) and negative (saline) controls, and skin reactions are read at 15
and 30 minutes and at 12, 24, and 48 hours. The majority of flea-hypersensitive dogs have
both immediate and delayed reactions. About 30% have only delayed reactions. The
delayed reactions are often very mild compared with the typical immediate reaction. The
only change may be mild erythema or increased dermal thickness.
Other investigators have evaluated the Greer flea antigen in normal and flea-hypersensitive dogs. 573 Three grading systems were used to assess positive intradermal reactions:
(1) an intradermal reaction at least 3 mm larger than the negative control, (2) an intradermal reaction at least 5 mm larger than the negative control, and (3) an intradermal
reaction at least equal to the half-way point between size of the positive and negative
control reactions. The grading system wherein a positive reaction was defined as being at
least 5 mm larger than the negative control was the most accurate, being positive in 94%
of the flea-hypersensitive dogs and none of the normal dogs. When the "half-way point"
grading system was used, 100% of the hypersensitive and 67% of the normal dogs showed
positive results.
Recently, another whole body flea antigen was tested and the skin threshold concentration was found to be 1000 NU (Noon unitsi/ml.F" This antigen was then tested in 21
dogs with skin disease other than flea bite hypersensitivity and 24 flea-hypersensitive dogs
with the diagnosis based on clinical findings. Intradermal testing had an sensitivity of 88%,
a specificity of 90%, and an overall accuracy of 89% in diagnosing flea hypersensitivity.
It is essential to remember that a positive test reaction only means that the patient
has skin-sensitizing antibody or a cellular response to flea antigen. It does not necessarily
mean that the patient has clinical hypersensitivity, Thus, although virtually all flea-hypersensitive dogs and cats have positive skin test reactions to flea antigen, so does a portion
of the normal dog population, and so do some dogs with other dermatoses. In one study,
24% of normal dogs had positive intradermal reactions to flea antigen. 576a Two years later,
most of these dogs were still normal, suggesting that positive intradermal reactions were
not predictive of future flea bite hypersensitivity, Current or recent administration of
drugs, especially glucocorticoids and progestogens, can cause false-negative intradermal
test reactions. In some cases, a positive reaction in a dog on glucocorticoid therapy is still
produced.F" 565 With negative reactions, however, testing should be repeated after a
longer period of steroid withdrawal. It is also recommended to test for house dust or
house dust mites at the same time. 43, 67a This limited intradermal test with saline, histamine, flea, and house dust mite antigens allows for the recognition of many dogs that have
concurrent atopy. A positive house dust mite reaction occurs in about 50% of atopic dogs.
In vitro (serologic) tests are offered for diagnosis of flea bite hypersensitivity. Results
appear to vary greatly from company to company, and this at least partly reflects the
allergen utilized. Most normal and flea-hypersensitive dogs have high levels of IgG reactive with flea salivary proteins, which presents huge technical problems in assays that
attempt to measure antiflea IgE.389 In an experimental laboratory evaluation, the in vitro
tests were valuable if the flea antigen was optimized by partial purification.P First, they
detect only IgE-mediated disease, and up to 30% of flea-hypersensitive dogs primarily
have delayed intradermal reactions. Second, in contrast with results with other allergen
tests, one of us (C.E.G.) has seen many negative results in Hea-hypersensitive dogs that

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 631

had positive immediate intradermal skin test reactions. Lastly, some normal dogs had
positive serologic test results, suggesting that both sensitivity and specificity need to be
further evaluated. A recently developed assay utilizes two proprietary technologic breakthroughs in the development of an in vitro flea allergy test for IgE-mediated disease.P"
This study compared 18 flea-hypersensitive dogs with positive intradermal skin test reactions to 49 experimental dogs with no history of flea exposure. The serologic tests had a
sensitivity of 78%, specificity of 91%, and overall accuracy of 88% when compared with
intradermal skin test results with the same flea salivary antigen.
It appears that a good intradermal test will give better sensitivity with similar accuracy
and be faster and less expensive than the in vitro test. Whether these differences reflect
that intradermal testing detects more than IgE-mediated disease, or the obvious differences in whole body flea extract versus flea salivary extracts, remains to be determined.
• Histopathology. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing varying degrees of superficial perivascular (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic) to interstitial dermatitis, with eosinophils
often being a predominant cell type. 28. 67., 83. 551 In addition, eosinophilic intraepidermal
microabscesses in association with epidermal edema and necrosis (epidermal nibbles) may
be visible (see Fig. 8-13B). Histopathologic findings consistent with secondary bacterial
pyoderma (suppurative folliculitis, intraepidermal pustular dermatitis) are common.
Clinical Management

In general, it has been classically thought that flea bite hypersensitivity in dogs tends to
worsen as the animals age. Clinical signs begin a little earlier in the season, persist a little
longer, and tend to become progressively more severe. Naturally occurring desensitization
is apparently rare. This concept has come into question, however, with some evidence that
occasional dogs improve as they age. 29 Additionally, dogs with other concurrent allergies,
atopic disease, or food hypersensitivity may tolerate flea exposure much better if those
diseases are adequately controlled.
Therapy of flea bite hypersensitivity may include flea control (see Chap. 6), systemic
glucocorticoids, and hyposensitization.P" Of course, the single most effective therapy
would be separating the fleas from the pet or eliminating the fleas. This involves concentrating extermination efforts on the indoor and outdoor premises. Aggressive flea control
programs are necessary, and newer therapies have made the treatment of flea bite hypersensitivity without glucocorticoids a reality (see Chap. 6).552. 561 Ultrasonic collars and a
recent noninsecticidal metal tag (Catan Dog's tag) on the European market are of no
benefit.P'" Light traps assist in monitoring and controlling flea populations.v'" 546 Regular
use of a flea comb can dramatically reduce flea populations, especially in shorthaired
dogs.545• A thorough lO-minute combing can remove 81.5% of fleas.
Some topical therapies have been shown efficacious for flea-hypersensitive dogs. Permethrin spot applications or spray, fipronil (Frontline, Merial), and imidacloprid (Advantage, Bayer) have all been shown effective for flea bite hypersensitivity. However, some
outdoor dogs require very aggressive use of these products, and only those that are
approved for frequent application (permethrin sprays and imidacloprid) may be used
legally in some of these cases. Repellents need to be applied frequently to dogs that visit
outdoor areas that cannot be adequately treated for fleas. In one study, neither imidacloprid, fipronil spray, nor fipronil spot-on provided noticeable repellent effect on fleas.54o
Signs of developing insecticide resistance include (1) clients presenting pruritic fleahypersensitive dogs that the clinician has not seen since prescribing one of the new
insecticides, and (2) clinicians noticing that products that used to control fleas and flea
bite hypersensitivity for 1 month now only work for 2 weeks.P" As resistance develops, it
takes longer for fleas to die and they are able to feed and inject antigen. Anecdotal
reports from the southern United States indicate that this is occurring, with clinicians
indicating that imidacloprid or fipronil now must be applied every 1 to 2 weeks to be
totally effective.
Prednisolone or prednisone is given orally at 1 mg/kg daily for 5 to 7 days and then
in an alternate-day regimen (see Chap. 3), as needed. Dogs with severe flea bite hyper-

632 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
sensitivity and heavy flea exposure may require 2.2 mg/kg daily to achieve remission and
then need much higher alternate-day dosages. If glucocorticoids are undesirable or unsatisfactory, some flea-hypersensitive dogs may respond to antihistamines (chlorpheniramine,
0.4 mg/kg q8h orally; diphenhydramine, 2.2 mg/kg q8h orally; or hydroxyzine, 2.2 mg/kg
q8h orally) or omega-3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing products (see Chap. 3).
The efficacy of hyposensitization in canine flea bite hypersensitivity is still controversial. Enthusiastic proponents and outspoken critics abound.v- 67. Initial double-blind
controlled studies in dogs showed that hyposensitization with aqueous'P' and alumprecipitated's" 572 whole flea antigens is rarely effective as well as being expensive and
time-consuming. Hyposensitization was used for only 3 to 4 months in these studies,
however, a much shorter time than that used for atopy (see Canine Atopy). A doubleblind, placebo-controlled study utilizing C. felis salivary antigens in a rush immunotherapy
protocol did show efficacy compared with a placebo-treated group.562 This study certainly
indicated the potential for flea hyposensitization. On the basis of current information,
treatment of canine flea bite hypersensitivity with commercially available whole flea extracts should be viewed as a last-ditch therapeutic effort. It would seem most appropriate
that, if hyposensitization were to be tried, the flea salivary antigens (Heska Corp.) should
be used.

FELINE FLEA BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
It has long been thought that feline flea bite hypersensitivity (flea allergy dermatitis) is the
most common feline hypersensitivity disease in areas where fleas are present, causing a
variety of clinical syndromes, all characterized by pruritus.Fs In one study, 70% of cats
referred for suspicion of food hypersensitivity actually had flea bite hypersensitivity alone
or with other diseases based on response to flea control.v" However, in a study of 88 cats
with allergic skin disease, 9% had only flea bite hypersensitivity, but 47% had flea bite
hypersensitivity as one component of their skin disease, and atopic disease was the most
prevalent problem.t'" In the United Kingdom, fleas were found on 18% to 26% of the
cats, even in winter.F? The prevalence of flea bite hypersensitivity in the same study
varied from 6% to 14%.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Though much research has been conducted on flea bite hypersensitivity in the dog and
guinea pig, very little has been done in the cat. 29. 61, 67. This is particularly interesting
because cats are used to maintain both research and commercial populations of the cat
flea, Ctenocephalides felis felis. The guinea pig and dog have very different immunopathogenic responses to flea antigen; therefore, it may be inappropriate to assume that cats will
react as the other species would. Most flea-hypersensitive cats have immediate positive
intradermal test reactions to flea antigen. Experimental sensitization of cats to flea bites
resulted in lesions in all the continuously exposed cats and no lesions in the intermittently
exposed cats, which is in contrast with what has been described in dogs. 578 Interestingly,
all the intermittently exposed cats experienced positive intradermal skin test reactions, but
only 60% had positive in vitro test results with the same flea salivary allergen. Overall,
when tested with flea salivary allergen, 88% were positive on intradermal skin testing, and
88% were positive on the serum in vitro assay. Based on intradermal skin test results, the
serum test had an overall accuracy of 82%. This study also evaluated one flea-hypersensitive cat serum for heat lability of the positive serum. Heat inactivation at 56°C greatly
diminished and heat inactivation at 57°C abolished the reaction, indicating this was a IgEmediated reaction. In one study, delayed skin test reactions were reported in three of
seven flea-hypersensitive cats at both 24 and 48 hours.F" Even some normal cats with
negative intradermal test results have mild histopathologic changes at the site of intradermal flea extract injections or flea bites, suggesting that subclinical reactions occur..577
Clinical Features

Na age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported. Papulocrustous eruptions are
usually considered the most typical lesions of flea bite hypersensitivity in the cat (see Fig.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 633

8_12G).67a This cutaneous reaction pattern, called miliary dermatitis, is particularly common in cats and may be caused by a number of specific diseases (Table 8-24). However,
in one prospective study of perennially pruritic cats, the most prevalent reaction pattern
was symmetric alopecia in flea-hypersensitive cats, but papulocrustous lesions were statistically more prevalent in the cats with flea bite hypersensitivity and atopic disease.P?
Alopecia, excoriations, crusts, and scales may also be found. Alopecia may also occur as a
result of cats excessively grooming to remove fleas. It has been shown that flea-hypersensitive cats are more effective at removing fleas than flea-naive cats. Additionally, the
hypersensitive cats produce an unknown factor that results in the production of fewer flea
eggs.579 Pigment changes may occur, and multifocal small melanotic macules are evidence
of previous inflammatory sites. Lesions are typically confined to the dorsal lumbosacral
area (see Fig. 8-12H), caudomedial thighs, ventral abdomen, flanks, and neck. Generalized cutaneous signs may be present in severely hypersensitive animals.
Flea-hypersensitive cats may also present with (1) self-induced symmetric alopecia
(little or no dermatitis) or (2) eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions (indolent ulcer,
eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic granuloma, or some combination of these three lesions)
(see Chap. 18).61. 67a. 581 In addition, any given cat may manifest various combinations of
these reaction patterns. Secondary bacterial pyoderma occurs occasionally. Cats with flea
bite hypersensitivity may experience moderate to marked peripheral lymphadenopathy.v"
Rarely, cats manifest an erythematous papulopustular eruption characterized clinicopathologically as a sterile eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis.v't Because infiltrative eosinophilic mural folliculitis occurs at the site of flea bite sites and intradermal injections of flea
antigen within 24 hours, this appears to be a reaction to flea antigen. 577 Disease often
becomes more severe as the cats age. Cats with flea bite hypersensitivity may have
concurrent atopy and/or food hypersensitivity, which can greatly complicate the diagnostic
work-up as well as the therapeutic regimen.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis depends on which clinical syndrome is being examined. Most
commonly, the differential diagnosis for miliary dermatitis (see Table 8-24) must be
considered, with atopy, food hypersensitivity, cheyletiellosis, and dermatophytosis being
the primary alternatives in most cases. The diagnosis is based on the history and physical
findings. The presence of fleas, flea dirt, flea eggs, or infestation with the tapeworm
Dipylidium caninum all provide circumstantial evidence. Recent bathing or grooming,
however, may remove all evidence of fleas. Neither does the mere presence of fleas on a
cat with one of the typical cutaneous reaction patterns confirm that the fleas are causing

• Table 8-24

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF WIDESPREAD
PAPULOCRUSTOUS DERMATITIS ("MILIARY
DERMATITIS") IN THE CAT
Hypersensitivity reactions

Ectoparasitisms

Infections
Dietary imbalances

Flea bite hypersensitivity
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Drug reaction
Intestinal parasite hypersensitivity
Pemphigus foliaceus
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
Cheyletiellosis
Otodectic mange
Trombiculosis
Cat fur mite
Pediculosis
Dermatophytosis
Staphylococcal folliculitis
Biotin deficiency
Fatty acid deficiency

634 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
the dermatosis. Cytologic examination of papulocrustous lesions and eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions usually demonstrates numerous eosinophils and occasional basophils
(Fig. 8-14). EOSinophilia, occasionally with basophilia, is often present.
Intradermal allergy testing with flea antigen, as described for the dog, produces a
positive immediate reaction.v- 67a, 578, 580, 581 One should remember that a positive intradermal reaction to flea antigen only means that the cat is sensitized to the antigens; it does
not prove that the cat has clinical flea bite hypersensitivity. In one study, 36% of the
clinically normal cats that had been exposed to fleas had a positive immediate skin test
reaction to flea antigen. 58o In another study, 17% of specific pathogen-free cats also had
positive intradermal skin test reactions and serologic test results for flea salivary antigen.F"
It is also useful to test at the same time with house dust mite to investigate the possibility
of concurrent atopy. 43, 67a Limited evaluation of serum in vitro testing for feline flea bite
hypersensitivity has shown poor predictive value. However, preliminary studies with the
canine FCE RI-a receptor-based serologic tests have shown an overall predictive value of
82% and a better correlation with the clinical presentation than did intradermal testing
with the same antigen. 578
• Histopathology. Skin biopsy is not diagnostic but typically shows varying degrees
of superficial or deep perivascular to interstitial dermatitis with numerous eosinophils and
mast cells.28 , 67a, 83. 455. 477 Infiltrative mural eosinophilic folliculitis may be visible at the sites
of flea bites and delayed skin test reactions.F" Cats presenting with clinical lesions of
indolent ulcer, eosinophilic plaque, and eosinophilic granuloma have dermatohistopathologic findings consistent with these entities (see Chap. 18).
Clinical Management

Therapy of flea bite hypersensitivity includes vigorous flea control and is most successful
in cats kept predominantly indoors or in a controlled environment (see Chap. 6).67a, 565
Flea control has been revolutionized with the advent of more effective topical and
systemic formulations for killing fleas, eggs, and larvae, but still more aggressive therapy
may be required for the flea-hypersensitive outdoor cat. 575 For roaming outdoor cats,
imidacloprid (Advantage, Bayer) applied every 1 to 2 weeks has been effective for many
cases in our experience. Anecdotally, fipronil (Frontline, Merial) is also very effective at
more frequent intervals, but this goes against EPA-labeled use and is illegal. Fipronil
spray and imidacloprid spot-on are excellent adulticides but did not kill the majority of
fleas before they were able to consume at least some quantity of blood. 543 Flea repellents
are helpful, but they must be applied daily and are not tolerated by many cats. Regular
use of a flea comb can dramatically reduce flea populations, especially in shorthaired
cats. 545a A thorough lO-minute combing can remove up to 81.5% of the fleas.

FIGURE 8-14. Feline flea bite
hypersensitivity. Cytologic examination reveals numerous eosinophils
and smaller numbers of basophiis
(arrow).

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 635

Repositol methylprednisolone acetate (5 mg/kg or 20 mg/cat subcutaneously every 12
weeks) or oral prednisone or prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg q24h orally for 5 to 7 days then on
an alternate-day basis) is most commonly used for short-term relief of the hypersensitivity
or when flea control is ineffective (see Chap. 3). With severe flea infestations, the dosages
of these glucocorticoids may have to be doubled or a different glucocorticoid may be
needed (see Chap. 3) to achieve an adequate response. Chlorpheniramine (2 to 4 mg/cat
q12h orally), clemastine (0.68 mg/cat q12h orally), or hydroxyzine (2 mg/kg q12h orally)
may also be effective. 125, J.37. 147. 1,5,3. 181 Omega-6/omega-3 fatty acid-containing products
may also be useful. 108. 128 Hyposensitization in cats has been shown to be ineffective for
most cases, though an occasional cat may have a dramatic response.F"

TICK BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to tick bites have been recognized in dogs and
humans.P 61, 67a, 592, 598 The proposed pathomechanism of these reactions involves cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity and type III and type IV hypersensitivity responses. No age,
breed, or sex predilections have been reported.
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to tick bites in dogs and cats may be characterized by (1) focal areas of necrosis and ulceration, (2) nodules that mayor may not be
erythematous, pruritic, and ulcerated, and (3) pruritic pododermatitis. Diagnosis is based
on history and physical examination.
Skin biopsy may reveal leukocytoclastic vasculitis with hemorrhage, necrosis, and
ulceration (type III reaction) or nodular to diffuse dermatitis due to granulomatous or
pyogranulomatous inflammation (type IV reaction), often with numerous eosinophils and
lymphoid hyperplasia. Tick mouth parts are seldom found in biopsy specimens.
Therapy includes tick removal and control. Surgical excision or glucocorticoids are
effective for severe or persistent reactions.

FELINE MOSQUITO BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity has been described as a clinical entity in cats.582-585
The original descriptions of this syndrome came from Australia.t'" but not until 1988 was
the etiology confirmed.P" This is an uncommon, seasonal, predominantly pinnal and facial
dermatitis of cats.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Two excellent studies have documented the mosquito as the cause of this syndrome.Y': 585
Lesions were shown to resolve without treatment when affected cats were confined to a
mosquito-free environment. After challenge with mosquito bites, lesions developed at the
sites of the bites. In addition, previously normal haired skin was shaved and challenged
with mosquito bites. Again, these sites developed the typical lesions. Wheals were seen
within 20 minutes, papules occurred at 12, 24, and 48 hours, and papulocrustous lesions
developed at 48 hours.P" Intradermal allergy testing with mosquito antigen indicates that
one component of the pathogenesis may involve a type I hypersensitivity.P" 585 In one
study, P-K testing results were positive in three of three cats tested and negative with
control cat serum:585 Histopathologic findings, however, include an initially perivascular,
then diffuse to nodular dermatitis with an intense eosinophilic infiltrate and foci of
collagen flame figures. These latter findings do not occur in typical type I reactions,
suggesting that more is involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder.
Clinical Features

To date, no age, breed, or sex predilections have been recognized. The largest reported
series of 26 cases had a median age of 3.3 years with a range of 9 months to 8 years. 585 It
is interesting to note that all 26 cats in this study had dark hair on their pinnae. The
disease is seasonal, coinciding with the mosquito season. Affected cats usually are kept
outdoors or allowed access to the outdoors, though the disease has been reported in an

636 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
indoor cat. 585 Pruritus is usually present, but the severity is variable. The earlier lesions
consist of erythematous papules to plaques that often have an erosive or ulcerated,
necrotic, or crusted appearance (Fig. 8-15E). Chronic lesions include nodules, pigment
changes (melanoderma or, most commonly, leukoderma), alopecia, and scaling (Fig.
8-15F). The development of multiple lesions often results in a polycyclic plaque or patch
of alopecia interspersed with areas of acute lesions, scales, or crust. These lesions are
usually found on the pinnae (primarily the convex surface, but the concave surface may be
affected), bridge of the nose and, rarely, the eyelids and footpads.583-585 The nasal planum
and nasal philtrum may be involved and have small punctate crusted depressions. Footpads may also be affected with swelling, hyperkeratosis, fissures, and pigment changes.
Less commonly, the chin and lips may be affected. 582 Lymphadenopathy and, in acute
cases, pyrexia may occur.
Diagnosis

The major components of the differential diagnosis are pemphigus foliaceus or erythematosus, atopy, food hypersensitivity, and dermatophytosis. In endemic areas, feline poxvirus
infection is also an alternative. The clinical presentation is fairly distinctive, and the
tentative diagnosis is relatively well confirmed by keeping the cat indoors or hospitalized
for 5 days, at which point the lesions are much improved. If confinement is not possible,
the use of repellents on the affected areas may help establish the diagnosis. In other
cases, this may be impossible or ineffective, and ruling out other possible diagnoses by
biopsy and other laboratory tests helps establish a diagnosis. Peripheral eosinophilia occurred in 16 of 18 cats. 585 Hypergammaglobulinemia was present in all cats tested.F"
• Histopathology. Skin biopsy reveals severe superficial and deep eosinophilic inflammation that is initially perivascular, then interstitial, and finally diffuse. 28, 67a, 583-585
Infiltrative eosinophilic mural folliculitis and furunculosis, dermal mucinosis, and flame
figures are often present (Fig. 8-16). The finding of eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis is uncommon in eosinophilic granulomas of other causes and, when found in cats and
dogs, is more often associated with arthropods bites or insect stings. 584 Similar histopathologic changes can occasionally occur in cats with atopy, food hypersensitivity, and flea bite
hypersensitivity.454.455
Clinical Management

Confinement indoors during the mosquito season, or at least during the peak mosquito
feeding time, is beneficial. If this is not possible, repositol methylprednisolone acetate (20
mg/cat or 5 mg/kg subcutaneously) is usually effective and relatively safe because this
entity is a seasonal problem. Alternatively, oral glucocorticoids may be used (see Chap. 3).
In all cases, but especially those in which glucocorticoids cannot be used, mosquito
repellents in the form of pyrethrins with MGK 264, dimethyl metatolulimide (DEET), or
butoxypolypropylene are helpful. Repellents do not need to be applied to the whole body,
only to the shorthaired and sparsely haired areas.

INSECT AND ARACHNID HYPERSENSITIVITY
Numerous insects and arachnids that may stimulate an immune response exist in the
normal dog and cat environment.s'< 594, ,598 These hypersensitivity reactions induce a pruritic disease that involves short or sparsely haired areas.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Insects and arachnids are known to produce a number of potentially allergenic substances that may be present in their saliva, feces, or exoskeletons (body/wing parts,
hairs).587, 593, 594, 597 Dogs have been shown to develop IgE antibodies to a variety of these
allergens. 593, 594 In humans, the insect allergens may be injected (by bite or sting), inhaled,
or absorbed percutaneously and induce the allergic reaction.P' How allergen access occurs
in dogs and cats has not been documented but is thought to be similar to what occurs in

FIGURE 8-15. A, Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. Multiple papules and ulcers on the bridge of
the nose and upper eyelid associated with exposure to wasps. B, Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
Erythematous papules and ulcerated, oozing nasal plaque. (Courtesy of K. V. Mason.) C, Erythematous papules
on bridge of nose of a dog with cutaneous dirofilariasis. D, Ulcerated, crusted nodule on head of a dog with
cutaneous dirofilariasis. E, Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Plaquelike swelling, ulceration, and depigmentation of bridge of nose and nasal planum. F, Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Note presence of mosquito on
depigmented, alopecic bridge of nose and nasal planum. (Courtesy of K. V. Mason.) G, Multiple erythematous
pustules on the abdomen of a dog with bacterial hypersensitivity. (From Scott DW, et al: Staphylococcal
hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:766, 1978.) H, Hemorrhagic bulla skin test reaction 48
hours after the intradermal injection of Staphylococcus aureus bacterin-toxoid (Staphoid A-B) in a dog with
bacterial hypersensitivity. (From Scott DW, et al: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 14:766, 1978.)

637

638 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-16. Feline mosquito
bite hypersensitivity. Infiltrative, necrotizing eosinophilic mural folliculitis
and furunculosis.

humans. These hypersensitivities are common in atopic animals and may even be considered a subcategory of atopy.
In about 50% of suspected atopic dogs in the southwestern United States that have
negative intradermal test reactions to routine allergens (pollens, molds, epithelia, flea, and
house dust mites), positive intradermal reactions to one or more insects or arachnids are
present.P' Another report from the eastern United States indicated that results in 15.6%
of atopic dogs were negative or only weakly positive to traditionally tested allergens,
including flea and house dust mite. 59o Fourteen percent of these dogs with negative or
weakly positive results had positive reactions to at least one of the insects tested. In
contrast, a study conducted in the northeastern United States determined that results in
63% of the atopic dogs tested with regional aeroallergens and insects were positive to one
or more insects, but none of the dogs had a positive reaction for insects alone. 602
Another study evaluated intradermal injections of insect allergens to flea, fire ant,
blackfly, deerfly, horsefly, mosquito, Culicoides spp., house dust mite, black ant, caddis fly,
cockroach, housefly, and moth. 392 It showed that normal pet dogs had the same incidence
of reactions as atopic dogs, except to fleas. This study also tested with a Dermataphagoides farinae antigen at 1:50,000 w/v/ml and found no difference in incidence of positive
reactions between normal and atopic dogs. This is in contrast with one other study that
showed Significantly more reactions to D. farinae antigen in atopic dogs. 33o In experimental studies on house dust mite reactions in laboratory and normal pet dogs, normal
laboratory Beagles were negative to house dust mite antigen, whereas normal house pets
were more likely to be positive.s-" This may reflect real IgE reactions that are due to
either a clinically insignificant type of IgE or a sensitivity not associated with clinical
disease for other reasons. !94, 216 Another study in 15 normal laboratory Beagles recorded
no positive reactions to insects with the same allergens that caused numerous positive
reactions in 10 atopic dogs. 345 , 593
Cross-reactivity among a variety of insects (house fly, horsefly, deerfly, caddis fly,
black fly, black ant, fire ant, moth, mosquito, cockroach, and flea) was evaluated.s'" Black
fly, black ant, cockroach, and flea were found to have significant cross-reactivity. Mites
such as Otodectes and Sarcoptes are known to produce hypersensitivity reactions that may
cross-react with house dust mites.F" 375. 595 Though cross-reactivity could explain some
cases seen clinically, it still would be expected that, if the animal were hypersensitive to
house dust mite, those intradermal test results would be positive as well. More studies are
awaited to further evaluate cross-reactivity. Allergens for cockroach are being identified
in humans and hopefully will be evaluated in dogs to determine whether they are
different. 59 !

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 639

Further evidence that insect/arachnid hypersensitivity is a real clinical entity would be
the response to therapy. One of us (C.KG.) and others have seen cases with positive
insect avoidance/repellent reactions that respond to insect therapy.590, 592 Even better
evidence that this is IgE-mediated hypersensitivity would be beneficial response to hyposensitization. Evidence against this is found in one study that indicated no difference in
immunotherapy success rates in two groups of insect-positive dogs when insects were left
out or included in the hyposensitization formula. 602 One of us (C.KG.) has several cases
that were only or mainly insect-hypersensitive that have responded to hyposensitization,
but further studies are needed to adequately answer this question.
Clinical Features

No age, breed, or sex predilections have been described. The onset may be sudden and
occasionally is historically correlated with an increase in insect or arachnid numbers in the
animal's environment. The primary symptom is pruritus, though erythematous maculopapular dermatitis may be present. Depending on the offending allergen, these cases may be
seasonal, with clinical signs being worst in warm weather. Chronic pruritus can lead to
secondary alopecia, crusting, lichenification, and secondary bacterial pyoderma. Occasionally in chronic cases, nodules or firm plaques are present. Glabrous skin or short-haired
areas are more commonly affected. As a result, the abdomen, groin, axillae, face, distal
extremities, and pinnae are most commonly affected.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis consists of atopy, scabies, food hypersensitivity, bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis, and contact hypersensitivity. A helpful feature differentiating this
type of hypersensitivity from atopy that may occur in some cases is the presence of a
papular dermatitis not associated with bacterial folliculitis.
The diagnosis is suggested by a compatible history and physical findings and is
confirmed by positive intradermal test reactions to insect or arachnid antigens. Intradermal allergy testing, as described for atopy, is performed with the antigens listed in Table
8-25. Cytologic examination of a specimen taken from a papule may reveal a mixture of
neutrophils and eosinophils .
• Histopathology. Histopathology has not been reported for a large group of cases
but, in limited numbers of animals, a hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis with
mononuclear cells, mast cells, and some eosinophils was found. Nodular and plaque-like
lesions show a multinodular lymphocytic to granulomatous dermatitis with numerous
eosinophils.
Clinical Management

Avoidance, if possible, is the treatment of choice, but some insect and arachnid allergens
are significantly aerosolized during peak seasons, making their avoidance impossible.s'"

• Table 8-25

RESULTS OF INTRADERMAL TESTS TO INSECTS
AND ARACHNIDS IN 193 SUSPECT
ATOPIC DOGS·
ANTIGEN

Black fly
Mosquito
Deer fly
Horsefly
Red ant
Black ant
Housefly
Cockroach
'Southem California.

NO. OF DOGS WITH 3 OR 4+
REACTIONS
11.4

7.8
9.3
17.1
5.7
4.2
Not done
Not done

PNU

1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000
1000

640 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Avoidance is best accomplished by keeping the animals indoors as much as possible and
utilizing an aggressive insect control regimen such as described for flea control (see Chap.
6). Medical management with glucocorticoids is usually effective. Prednisone, 1 mg/kg
q24h until the condition is controlled (3 to 7 days), then on an alternate-day regimen, is
most commonly used. Antihistamines and fatty acids (see Chap. 3) may also be tried,
though their efficacy is not as good.
Storage Mite-Related Hypersensitivity

Storage mites are mites known to infest foodstuffs. Classically, the storage mites belong to
the family Tyroglyphidae, though other families of mites are also important invaders of
foodstuffs. Multiple genera and species exist. These mites infest flour, grains, cereal foods,
cheese, dried fruits, dried meats, jams, and jellies. Several of these mites occur in large
enough numbers and frequency to be important sources of environmental allergens. The
species studied the most in dogs are Acarus siro, Glycyphagus domesticus, and Tyrophagus putrescentiae. 61• 304. 354. 604 Acarus siro, also called the grain or flour mite, is one of the
most frequently encountered and feeds on many foodstuffs as well as fungi and molds.
Tyrophagus putrescentiae, also known as the mold mite or copra mite, is another common
food-infesting mite found worldwide that likes foods with high fat or protein content. This
mite has been found in most foodstuffs that the other mites are reported to infest, as well
as well as brewer's yeast and herring meal, which are frequently added to dog foods.
Glycyphagus domesticus is also called the grocer's itch mite and furniture mite. It has a
food preference for rolled oats, brewer's yeast, and vegetable fibers, including some
commonly used as furniture stuffing. It establishes larger infestations with higher moisture
levels and is found in association with damp structures and mildew.
With the advent of dog foods containing newer ingredients such as rice, other mites
may be important to consider. The scaly grain mite, Suideasia nesbetti, is found in rice
and bran. The predatory mite, Cheyletus eruditus, is the most common predator of the
food-infesting mites. This mite may become more prevalent than the grain or mold mite,
especially as food is stored at lower moisture contents. In certain situations, there are
many other mites that may be more numerous than these common ones. Similar to the
situation with house dust mites, regional differences are likely to exist and, if crossreactivity is poor, other important allergens may be waiting to be identified.
The source of allergen for testing may be as important as which mites one is testing
for. One of us (C.KG.) tested 20 atopic dogs with Tyrophagus putrescentiae from HAL in
June-July 1995, with only 2 (10%) having a 3+ reaction and no dogs having 2+ or 4+
reactions. During the same two months in 1996, 25 atopic dogs were tested with ALK
allergens, and 7 (28%) had 3+ or greater reactions to T. putrescentiae and an additional 5
dogs had 2+ reactions. In one study, 36.9% and 55.4% of atopic dogs reacted to intradermal injections of A. siro and T. putrescentiae, respectively.l'" In Greece, 48.4% of atopic
dogs reacted to A. siro but, because the prevalence of this mite is very low in Greek
homes, it was suggested that this may represent cross-reactivity with D. farinae or other
rnltes.F?
• Clinical Features. Clinical presentation appears similar to atopic dermatitis. One
report included several dogs presenting primarily for diarrhea.P" This report also suggested that lip and muzzle pyoderma may be a manifestation of storage mite dermatitis.
• Diagnosis. Appropriate clinical signs and intradermal testing are currently the
preferred method of making a tentative dlagnosis. However, because one major source for
these mites is dry dog food, a diet trial to home-prepared or canned dog food may also be
conducted.
• Therapy. Therapy includes avoidance as well as the routine drugs used for the
management of the atopic dog. Specific studies on hyposensitization have not been reported. One pruritic dog with a positive intradermal test reaction to storage mites responded to changing the diet from dry food to canned food only.588 This dog experienced
relapse when challenged with commercial dry dog foods containing lamb and rice but
improved when fed home-cooked lamb and rice or canned lamb and rice.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 641
Otodectic Acariasis

Hypersensitivity appears to playa role in some cases of otodectic acariasis (otodectic
mange, ear mites) in cats (see Chaps. 6 and 19).67.,598 Clinically, cats occasionallyexperience a widespread, pruritic, papulocrustous dermatitis associated with Otodectes cynotis
infestation.F" Immunologically, passive cutaneous anaphylaxis reactions to 0. cynotis antigen were reported in cats with experimentally induced ear mite infestations, demonstrating the existence of reaginic antibody. 600 In addition, cats may have facial or generalized
pruritic dermatitis that responds to ivermectin. Otodectes mites may be difficult to find in
some cases.
Canine Eosinophilic Furunculosis of the Face

Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face is an acute, predominantly nasal and muzzle
disease that appears severe but is generally self-limiting or exquisitely responsive to
glucocorticoids.
• Cause and Pathogenesis. This syndrome was initially described in nine dogs in
which the common potential inciting feature was exposure to bees or wasps.607 Since then,
other reports or observations have been made. 67', 605, 606. 608 Cases have been seen in winter
(no flying insects present), wherein the dogs had been seen playing with or following
spiders. 67.,606 A Similar-looking but chronic case was seen in which intradermal allergy test
reactions to blackfly and horsefly were positive.F" Eosinophils were numerous on cytologic
evaluation of this dog. Because of the chronic history of the case and the lack of
histopathologic evaluation, however, it may represent a different syndrome. However,
another report did include a dog with a 3-month duration of nodules.P" EOSinophilic
furunculosis of the face has been proposed to be some type of hypersensitivity reaction to
an attack by some insect or arthropod. 607, 609 However, some dogs apparently have no
known or possible exposure to insects and arthropods.f'< 608 The condition is generally of
short duration and not recurrent. Hence, if it is a hypersensitivity reaction, these cases
either resolve with no persistent sensitivity or the animals learn to avoid the offending
arthropod/insect. The exact pathomechanism is unknown, and further studies are needed
regarding both pathomechanism and etiology.
• Clinical Features. Age of onset was under 2 years in about 50% of the affected
dogs. Specific breed predilections are not yet determined but, typically, large or midsize
breeds are affected. Toy and miniature breeds have not been described with this syndrome. No sex predilection has been determined. Onset is very acute; often the dog is
normal when it goes outside but returns home within hours with fully developed lesions.
The severity of the reaction often peaks within 24 hours, and the course with just
antibiotics or without treatment is 14 to 21 days. The dogs present with papules, nodules,
plaques, and varying degrees of ulceration, serum exudation, hemorrhage, and crusts (see
Fig. 8-15A and B). Pruritus may be absent or intense, and the lesions may be painful.605-608 Early lesions were described as erythematous or hemorrhagic blisters or papules.
Lesions are present on the bridge of the nose, on the muzzle, and often periocularly (see
Fig. 8-16A and B). Occasionally, lesions may be on the trunk (especially the relatively
glabrous ventral abdomen and thorax [Fig. 8-17B]), extremities (Fig. 8-17A and C),
pinnae, and lips.605. 608 Most dogs are otherwise healthy, but some may be febrile, anorexic, and lethargic.605, 608 Recurrences have not been reported, though one dog with more
generalized lesions and compatible histopathology seen by one of us (C.KG.) did have
two episodes.
• Diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is staphylococcal nasal folliculitis and furunculosis. If lesions persist, dermatophytosis may also be considered. EOSinophilic furunculosis of the face has a striking history and appearance, however, making a clinical
diagnosis rather Simple. Cytologic examination reveals numerous eosinophils.
Occasionally, degenerate neutrophils with intracellular bacteria are present, but they probably reflect a secondary bacterial pyoderma. Blood eosinophilia was present in seven of
nine dogs examined. 605, 608
Histopathology. Skin biopsy and examination reveals infiltrative eosinophilic mural

642 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-17. Case of eosinophilic furunculosis and eosinophilic vasculitis. Lesions developed acutely while dog was boarded in a
kennel. Suspected spider or insect bite on the
rear leg, where lesions were initially most severe (A) but also developed lesions on the
pinnae, abdomen (B), face and shoulder (C).

folliculitis, luminal eosinophilic folliculitis, and eosinophilic furunculosis (Fig. 8-18).28, 607
Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages are also present in smaller numbers. Marked
dermal and subcutaneous mucinosis and ulceration are common. Focal or multifocal areas
of dermal hemorrhage and flame figures are also often found.
• Clinical Management. The prognosis is excellent. Systemic glucocorticoid therapy
is very effective, with the majority of dogs responding rapidly within 24 to 48 hours, and
lesions being completely resolved with 10 to 14 days. Oral prednisone, 1 to 2 mg/kg q24h
until lesions have greatly resolved, then on an alternate-day basis for 10 more days, is
usually effective, although repositol glucocorticoids could potentially be used because longterm therapy is not required.

INTESTINAL PARASITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Various intestinal parasites (ascarids, Coccidia, hookworms, tapeworms, whipworms) of
dogs, cats, and humans may rarely be associated with pruritic dermatoses.s- 61. 670. 598 The
pathomechanism of these dermatoses is unknown, but a type I hypersensitivity reaction is
likely. Although the pathomechanism is unknown, a clear relationship between the parasite
and the dermatosis is established, because (1) eliminating the parasites cures the dermatosis and (2) re-infestation with the parasite reproduces it.
Clinical signs may consist of (1) generalized or multifocal pruritic, papulocrustous
dermatitis, (2) pruritic seborrheic skin disease, (3) pruritic urticaria, or (4) pruritus without
skin lesions. Other signs referable to intestinal parasitism mayor may not be present. No
age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported,

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 643

FIGURE 8-18. Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. A, Note marked accumulation of eosinophils in follicles
(upper thin arrow), numerous collagen flame figures (notched arrow), and prominent mucinosis of the middle and deep
dermis (curved arrow). B, Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face. Hair follicle has been literally replaced by
eosinophils.

Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, fecal examinations, and response
to therapy. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing varying degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), often with small to large numbers of eosinophils.
Therapy includes elimination of the parasites and treatment of symptoms with topical
(shampoos, soaks) and systemic medicaments (glucocorticoids), as indicated.

FILARIASIS
Dirofilariasis

Numerous rare skin disorders associated with Dirofilaria immitis infection (heartworm
disease) have been described in dogs (see Chap. 6).61, 67a, 598, 599 The pathomechanism of
these skin disorders is unknown, although a hypersensitivity to D. immitis microfilaria has
been suggested, No age, breed, or sex predilections have been reported.
Cutaneous syndromes reported in association with dirofilariasis in dogs include (1) a
pruritic, ulcerative, nodular dermatitis of the head, trunk, and limbs (see Fig, 8-15C and
D), (2) a pruritic papulocrustous dermatitis resembling canine scabies, (3) a pruritic
ulcerative dermatitis of the head and limbs, (4) an erythematous, alopecic dermatitis of
the chest and limbs, (5) interdigital cyst, and (6) seborrheic skin disease.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, demonstration of D, immitis
microfilaria in peripheral blood and in skin specimens, ruling out of other possible causes
of the dermatosis, and response to therapy for dirofilariasis. Most dogs with dirofilariasis

644 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-19. Canine cutaneous dirofilariasis. Perivascular pyogranuloma with microfilarial
segment within blood vessel.

have peripheral eosinophilia and serum hypergammaglobulinemia.w About 50% of affected
dogs also have peripheral basophilia. In about 20% of the dogs with dirofilariasis, microfilaria cannot be demonstrated in peripheral blood (occult dirofilariasis) owing to an immune-mediated reaction against microfilarial antigen. Various ELISA methods for the
detection of adult D. immitis-associated antigens (Filarochek, Mallinckrodt; Dirochek,
Synbiotics; ClinEase-CH, Norden; CITE, Agri Tech Systems) are very useful for the
detection of occult dirofilariasis.F
Histologic examination of the nodular form of cutaneous dirofilariasis reveals superficial and deep perivascular to nodular dermatitis.i" 67a. 83 Eosinophils are numerous. Pyogranulomas may be situated perivascularly, with microfilaria present intravascularly (Fig.
8-19) or interstitially surrounding extravascular microfilaria (Fig. 8-20).
Therapy consists of the administration of adultictdal and microfilaricidal drugs. Cutaneous lesions heal within 5 to 8 weeks after the completion of microfilaricidal therapy.
Filarioidea Dermatitis

A report in 10 dogs with a filarial nematode in the skin other than Dirofilaria or
Dipetalonema was published {see Chap. 6).596 All the dogs came from the southwestern
United States. The dogs presented with single or multiple, alopecic papules or plaques
and varying degrees of erythema, crusts, scarring, and ulceration. Eighty percent were
pruritic. All dogs had dorsal lesions. These dogs were heartworm antigen-negative and
yielded positive histopathologic results, with filarial segments in microgranulomas or free
in the dermis or subcutaneous tissue. In one case, an adult nematode was found in the
tissue that was identified as an Acanthocheilonema spp. Of the dogs treated and followed,
all responded to ivermectin therapy or surgical excision with steroids and antibiotics.

Hormonal Hypersensitivity
Hormonal hypersensitivity is a very rare, pruritic, papulocrustous dermatitis of dogs and
humans associated with hypersensitivity reactions to sex hormones.v- 61, 67a, 610

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 645

FIGURE 8-20. Canine cutaneous dirofilariasis. Extravascular microfilaria
within a granuloma.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Although the pathomechanism of the dermatitis in dogs is unknown, results of intradermal
allergy testing and basophil degranulation testing to progesterone suggest that type I and
type IV hypersensitivity reactions to endogenous progesterone, estrogen, or testosterone
are involved.s?< 610, 615, 616 In humans, a variety of skin disorders have been described,
including urticaria, erythema multiforme, stomatitis, pruritic erythematous dermatitis, and
vesicles.611-614 Reactions have been predominantly to progesterone, but estrogens may also
be involved. Cases are associated with antiprogesterone antibodies (usually IgG), positive
patch and prick test results, positive basophil degranulation to progesterone, and passive cutaneous transfer of skin test reactivity (positive P-K test result) to normal humans.F" 58, 67a, 616

CLINICAL FEATURES
No age or breed predilections have been reported, but over 90% of the reported cases
have occurred in intact females. Affected females often have a history of repeated pseudopregnancy, irregular estral cycles, or both. Dermatologic signs include a pruritic, erythematous, often papulocrustous eruption that usually begins in the dorsal rump, perineal,
genital, and caudomedial thigh regions, is bilaterally symmetric, and progresses cranially
(Figs. 8-21 and 8-22). The feet, face, and ears are commonly affected in chronic cases.
Enlargement of the vulva and nipples is common (Fig. 8-23). In female dogs, the
dermatologic signs usually coincide initially with estrus, pseudopregnancy, or both but
tend to become more severe and protracted with each episode until the dog may have

646 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 8-21. Canine hormonal
hypersensitivity. Traumatic and inflammatory alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification of ventral
neck and chest, axillae, and medial
forelimbs.

some degree of pruritic dermatitis at all times. In male dogs, dermatologic signs are
nonseasonal. 616
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, atopy,
drug eruption, and staphylococcal folliculitis. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical findings, intradermal allergy test results, and response to therapy. Intradermal
allergy testing has been performed with aqueous progesterone (0.025 mg), estrogen

FIGURE 8-22. Canine hormonal hypersensitivity. Traumatic and inflammatory alopecia with enlarged nipples.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 647

FIGURE 8-23. Canine hormonal hypersensitivity.
Inflammatory and traumatic alopecia with lichenification and vulvar enlargement.

(0.0125 mg), and testosterone (0.05 mg), and the skin is observed for immediate and
delayed hypersensitivity reactions.P"- 616 These hormones, however, are currently unavailable in aqueous form. The basophil degranulation test was useful in establishing the
diagnosis in five bitches67a , 615; however, this test is currently only a research tool (see
discussion of canine atopy).
Histopathology

Histopathology is nondiagnostic, revealing varying degrees of superficial perivascular
dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), with neutrophils or mononuclear cells predominating.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis of hormonal hypersensitivity is favorable if neutering can be performed.Fv 610, 615. 616 Therapy consists of ovariohysterectomy or castration and treatment of
symptoms with topical and systemic medicaments, as indicated. Response to neutering is
dramatic; marked improvement occurs within 5 to 10 days. Response to systemic glucocorticoids is often unsatisfactory. In females, response to repositol testosterone (1.0 mg/kg
intramuscularly) is a useful presurgical diagnostic aid, with dramatic relief of pruritus
occurring within 7 days. A similar response can be produced in males with the oral
administration of estrogen. 6 16

Bacterial Hypersensitivity
Bacterial hypersensitivity (staphylococcal hypersensitivity) is a rare, severely pruritic, pustular dermatitis in dogs associated with a presumed hypersensitivity reaction to staphylococcal antigen.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In humans, bacterial antigens are thought to elicit type I, II, III, and IV hypersensitivity
reactions in the skin. 23 . 67a The pathomechanism of bacterial hypersensitivity in dogs is

648 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases

unclear, although evidence supporting the existence of a type III, and perhaps a type I,
hypersensitivity reaction has been reported.P" 620 Dogs with recurrent bacterial pyoderma
may have elevated levels of circulating immune complexes.!" and these immune complexes
may contain staphylococcal (S. intermedius) antigens that stimulate canine neutrophils.v'P
Such staphylococcal immune complexes could precipitate vasculitis. Two studies of normal
dogs, dogs with nonrecurrent staphylococcal pyoderma, dogs with bacterial hypersensitivity, and dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma associated with atopy measured the
levels of circulating antistaphylococcal IgE and IgG.617b, 618a The levels of IgG were
elevated in all dogs that had experienced a staphylococcal infection, but IgE levels were
only elevated in dogs with bacterial hypersensitivity or recurrent pyoderma associated with
atopy.
Staphylococci are one group of bacteria known to produce a number of toxins that
function as superantigens. The role of bacterial superantigens needs to be investigated
because they can induce T-cell activation in an antigen-nonspecific way. Superantigens
applied to human skin, either normal or atopic, induce dermatitis but, in atopic patients,
dermatitis also occurs in other allergic sites where the superantigens were not applied. 621
Exotoxins A, C, and toxic shock syndrome toxin-l have been detected in some canine
S. intermedius isolates from normal dogs or dogs with atopy or bacterial pyoderma.t"?
There was no relationship with pruritus or type of lesion. Mason and Lloyd demonstrated
that the degranulation of canine cutaneous mast cells caused an increased epidermal
permeability to staphylococcal antigens. 241
Obviously, S. intermedius behaves as an antigen for some dogs. Theoretically, antistaphylococcal IgE, fixed to the surfaces of cutaneous mast cells and in the presence of
staphylococcal antigens, could cause the degranulation of mast cells, the liberation of
inflammatory mediators, the depression of local bacteriocidal mechanisms, and the augmentation of the absorption of staphylococcal antigens. These circumstances could encourage the persistence of infection and a vicious cycle of inflammation and pruritus.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Clinical signs associated with canine bacterial hypersensitivity are intense pruritus in
conjunction with a superficial or deep pustular and seborrheic dermatitis.619.620 Erythematous pustules and hemorrhagic bullae are present with bacterial hypersensitivity (see Fig.
8-15G and H). Annular or arciform areas of central erythema or hyperpigmentation,
alopecia, and scaling that spread peripherally and often coalesce are very common but
nondiagnostic. Some lesions may exhibit associated palpable purpura. Rarely, a dog manifests only an antibiotic-responsive, generalized, nonlesional pruritus.s'" Helpful historical
clues are prior pyogenic infection, poor or incomplete response to systemic glucocorticoids, and rapid response to appropriate systemic antibiotics. Relapse after cessation of
short-term antibiotic therapy is common.
Approximately 50% to 80% of these dogs have concurrent diseases that appear to
predispose them to, or to intensify, the bacterial hypersensitivity.619.620 Examples of such
diseases include seborrheic skin disease, hypothyroidism, other hypersensitivities (atopy,
food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity), and foci of chronic infection (anal sacculitis, gingivitis, tonsillitis, lip folds, otitis extema).

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis consists of bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis,
seborrheic skin disease, subcomeal pustular dermatosis, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis,
pemphigus foliaceus, atopy, food hypersensitivity, scabies, and flea bite hypersensitivity.
Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and results of bacterial
culture, skin biopsy, and intradermal allergy testing. All reported cases of canine bacterial
hypersensitivity have grown pure cultures of either coagulase-positive Staphylococcus spp.
(most cases) or coagulase-negative Staphylococcus spp. (rare cases).

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 649

FIGURE 8-24. Bacterial hypersensitivity in a dog. A, Suppurative luminal folliculitis with neutrophilic vasculitis and
purpura. B, Subepidermal hemorrhagic bulla. (B, from Scott DW, et al: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:766, 1978.)

Histopathology

Skin biopsy reveals varying degrees of vasculitis and intraepidermal pustular dermatitis or
folliculitis and furunculosis (Fig. 8_24).620 The vasculitis is usually mixed (neutrophils and
mononuclear cells), significant leukocytoclasis is common, and fibrinoid degeneration is
rare (Fig. 8-25).
Intradermal Allergy Testing

Intradermal allergy testing with a staphylococcal cell wall toxoid product (Staphoid A- B)
had been useful for diagnosing canine bacterial hypersensitivity.619-620 However, this prod-

FIGURE 8-25. Canine bacterial hypersensitivity. Mixed-cell (neutrophils, mononuclear
cells) vasculitis with endothelial swelling and degeneration and vacuolization of vessel wall.
(From Scott DW, et al: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
14:766, 1978.)

650 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
uct is no longer available. The product was diluted with an equal volume of sterile saline,
and 0.1 ml of the mixture was injected intradermally. In virtually all dogs, normal or
dermatitic from any cause, an immediate wheal and flare reaction developed that persisted for 12 to 18 hours and appeared to be an irritant in nature. At 24 to 72 hours after
injection, however, dogs with bacterial hypersensitivity experienced erythematous, indurated, oozing, pruritic reactions that often turned red-purple, became necrotic, and ulcerated (Arthus reaction) (see Fig. 8-15H). Diagnostic skin testing with bacterial antigens
presents problems resulting from a lack of uniformity of staphylococcal antigens, the
complex antigenic structure of staphylococci and their metabolites, and various nonirnmunologic cutaneous reactions.30.67a

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Treatment of canine bacterial hypersensitivity may vary, depending on the existence of
concurrent diseases and the age of the dog. In those cases in which an underlying disease
can be detected and successfully managed, a 3- to 8-week course of appropriate systemic
antibiotics is often curative. In cases in which no underlying disease can be detected but
the dog is less than 1 year of age, such a course of antibiotic therapy may still be curative.
When no underlying disease can be detected, however, and the dog is over 1 year of
age, the idiopathic bacterial hypersensitivity will probably have to be managed for life with
repeated antibiotic or biological therapy. Biological therapy is preferred, because repeated
antibiotic therapy can lead to increasing bacterial drug resistance, rising drug expense,
and euthanasia. In the past, biological therapy with Staphoid A-B had been reported
to be successful in 67% to 88% of mature dogs with idiopathic bacterial hypersensitivity.67a.619-620 This product is no longer available. An alternative treatment approved for the
dog is Staphage Lysate (Delmont Labs) (see Chap. 4). When biological therapy is unsuccessful, the therapy of choice for recurrent bacterial hypersensitivity is chronic antibiotic
administration (see Chap. 4).

Fungal Hypersensitivity
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to fungi are thought to be important in humans, but
the importance of such reactions in dogs and cats is unknown.s" 67a Hypersensitivity to
Candida albicans infections has been suspected in some cases of paronychia and gingivitis
in dogs and cats, in which the tissue response was out of proportion to the degree of
infection found. 67a Fungal kerions are thought to represent hypersensitivity reactions to
dermatophytes. Hypersensitivity reactions have been suspected in the pruritic widespread
papulocrustous eruptions (miliary dermatitis) in cats associated with Microsporum canis
infections.v's Malassezia dermatitis may also be, in part, a hypersensitivity reaction (see
Atopic Disease and Chap. 5).

• REFERENCES
General
1. An S, Goetzl EJ: Lipid mediators of hypersensitivity
and inflammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St.
Louis, 1998, p. 168.
2. Ansel J, et al: Cytokine modulation of keratinocyte
cytokines. J Invest Dermatol 94:101S, 1990.
3. Bacon KB, Schall TJ: Chemokines as mediators of
allergic inflammation. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 109:
97, 1996.
4. Benjamin E, et al: Immunology, A Short Course III.
Wiley-Liss, New York, 1996.
5. Beutner EH, et al: Immunopathology of the Skin III.
Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1987.

6. Bochner BS: Cellular adhesion in inflammation in allergic inflammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C. v. Mosby, St
Louis, 1998, p. 94.
7. Borish L, Rosenwasser LJ: Update on cytokines. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 97:719, 1996.
8. Borish L, Rosenwasser LJ: Cytokines in allergic inflammation. In: Middleton E, et aI (eds): Allergy
Principles and Practice V. C.v. Mosby, St. Louis,
1998, p. 108.
9. Bos JD: Skin Immune System. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1989.
10. Cannon AG, Affolter VK: What does "CD" mean?

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 651
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 14:133, 1998.
11. Charlesworth EN, et al: Cutaneous late-phase response to allergen: Mediator release and inflammatory
cell infiltration. J Clin Invest 83:1519, 1989.
12. Church MK, et al: Mast cell-derived mediators in
allergic inflammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds):
Allergy Principles and Practice V. c.v. Mosby, St.
Louis, 1998, p. 146.
13. Corrigan CJ: Biology of lymphocytes. In: Middleton
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V.
Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 228.
14. Dahl MV: Immunodermatology II. Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1988.
15. Day MJ: Expression of major histocompatibility complex class 11 molecules by dermal inflammatory cells,
epidermal Langerhans' cells and keratinocytcs in canine dermatological disease. J Comp Pathol 115:317,
1996.
16. Day MJ: A Color Atlas of Clinical Immunology of the
Dog and Cat. Iowa State University Press, Ames,
1999.
17. DeBoer OJ, et al: Circulating immune complex concentrations in selected cases of skin disease in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 49:143, 1988.
18. Dore M, et al: Production of a monoclonal antibody
against canine GMP-140 (P-selectin) and studies of its
vascular distribution in canine tissues. Vet Pathol 30:
213, 1993.
19. Elangbam CS, et al: Cell adhesion molecules-update. Vet Pathol 34:61, 1997.
20. Ettinger SJ, Feldlman EC: Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine IV, W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia,
1995.
21. Fadok VA: Immunology can be fun! The star wars
approach to immune function. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
15:81, 1999.
22. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dermatology in General Medicine III. McGraw-Hili, New York, 1993.
23. Freedberg 1M, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine V. McGraw-Hili, New York, 1999.
24. Gant VA, et al: Biology of monocytes and macrophages. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. c.v. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, P:
295.
25. Grant JA, Huamin L: Biology of basophtls, In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice
V. c.v. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 277.
26. Greeley EH, et al: The influence of age on the canine immune system. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
55:1, 1996.
27. Griffin CE, et al: Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1993.
28. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A
Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
and Feline Skin Disease. Mosby Year Book, Inc., St.
Louis, 1992.
29. Halliwell REW: Clinical and immunological aspects of
allergic skin diseases in domestic animals: In: von
Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia,
1990, p. 91.
30. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
31. Hargis AM, Liggit HD: Cytokines and their role in
cutaneous injury. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances

in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. :325.
32. Hauser C, et al: T helper cells grown with haptenmodified cultured Langerhans' cells produce interleukin 4 and stimulate IgE production by B cells. Eur J
Immunol 19:245, 1989.
33. Hauser C, Orbea HA: Superantigens and their role in
immune-mediated diseases, J Invest Dcrmatol 101:
503, 1993.
34. Prelaud 1': Allergologie Canine. Masson, Paris, 1999.
35. Hill PB, Martin RJ: A review of mast cell biology. Vet
Dennatol 9:145, 1998.
36. Ihrke PJ, et al: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993.
37. Jakob T, Udey MC: Epidermal Langerhans' cells:
From neurons to nature's adjuvants. Adv Dermatol
14:209, 1999.
38. Kearns RJ, et al: Effect of age, breed, and dietary
omega-6 (n-fi): Omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid ratio on immune function, eicosanoid production and lipid peroxidation in young and aged dogs. Vet Immunopathol
69:165, 1999.
39. Kita H, et al: Biology of eosinophils. In: Middleton E,
et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. c.v.
Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 242.
40. Kondo S, Sauder DB: Epidermal cytokines in allergic
contact dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 33:786,
1995.
41. Kube P, et al: Distribution, density, and heterogeneity
of canine mast cell depending on fixation techniques.
Histochem Cell BioI 110:129, 1998.
42. Lewis RM, Picut CA: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989.
43. Locke PH, et al: Manual of Small Animal Dermatology. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Shurdington, 1993.
44. Luger TA, Schwartz T: Evidence for an epidermal
cytokine network. J Invest Dennatol 95:100S, 1990.
45. Martin LB, et al: Eosinophils in allergy: Role in disease, degranulation, and cytokines. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 109:207, 1996.
46. McEwan BJ, et al: The response of the eosinophil in
acute inflammation in the horse. In: von Tscharner C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 176.
47. McKenzie RC, Sauder ON: The role of keratinocyte
cytokines in inflammation and immunity. J Invest
Dermatol 95:1O.5S, 1990.
48. Mecheris DB: Unravelling the mast cell dilemma:
Culprit or victim of its generoSity? Immunol Today
18:212, 1997.
49. Middleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice
IV. Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1993.
50. Middleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice V.
C.V. Mosby, St Louis, 1998.
51. Modlin RL: Lymphocytes. In: Freedberg 1M, et al
(eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine
V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 400.
52. Moore PF, et al: The use of immunological reagents
in defining the patllOgenesis of canine skin diseases
involving proliferation of leukocytes. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 77.
53. Muller GH, et al: Small Animal Dermatology IV.
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
54. Nickoloff 8J: Dermal Immune System. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, 1993.
5.5. Pentland AP: Arachidonic acid metabolism. In:

652 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999, p. 432.
56. Peters SP, et al: Late-phase allergic reactions. In:
Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 342.
57. Prelaud P: The basophil degranulation test in the diagnosis of canine allergic skin disease. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tlndall, Philadelphia, 1990,
p.117.
58. Prelaud P: Les Dermites A1lergiques du Chien et du
Chat. Masson, Paris, 1991.
59. Prieto VG, et al: Quantitative immunohistochemical
differences in Langerhans' cells in dermatitis due to
internal versus external antigen sources. J Cutan
Pathol 25:301, 1998.
60. Reedy LM, Miller WH Jr: AllergiC Skin Diseases of
Dogs and Cats. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989.
61. Reedy LM, et al: Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and
Cats, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1997.
62. Saint-Andre Marchal I, et al: Feline Langerhans' cells
migrate from skin and vaginal mucosa to regional
lymph nodes during experimental contact sensitization
with fluorescein isothiocyanate. Vet Dermatol 9:9,
1998.
63. Schwartz LB, et al: Biology of mast cells in allergic
inflammation. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy
Principles and Practice V. c.v. Mosby, St. Louis,
1998, p. 261.
64. Scott DW: Epidermal mast cells in the cat. Vet Dermatol 1:65, 1990.
65. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
66. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
67. Scott DW, et al: La dermatite miliaire feline: Une
modalite de reaction cutanee. Point Vet 19:284, 1987.
67a. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995.
68. Stingl G, et al: The epidermis: An immunologic microenvironment. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. MeGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 343.
69. Stone J: Dermatology, Immunology and Allergy.
Mosby Year Book, Inc., St. Louis, 1985.
70. Sunderkotter C, et al: Aging and the skin immune
system. Arch Dermatol 133:1256, 1997.
71. Swerlick RA, Lawley TJ: Role of microvascular endothelial cells in inflammation. J Invest Dermatol 100:
ins, 1993.
72. Thiers BH, Dobson RL: Pathogenesis of Skin Disease. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1986.
73. Thomsen MK: Species specificity in the generation of
eicosanoids: Emphasis on leukocyte-activating factors
in the skin of allergic dogs and humans. In: Ihrke PJ,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 63.
74. Thomsen MK: The Role of Neutrophil-Activating
Mediators in Canine Health and Disease. Ballerup,
Copenhagen, 1991.
75. Thompson JP: Basic immunologic principles of allergic disease. Semin Vet Med Surg 6:247, 1991.
76. Tizard IR: Veterinary Immunology: An Introduction
V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1997.
77. von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW: Advances in Veteri-

nary Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia,
1990.
78. Walsh LJ, Murphy GF: Role of adhesion molecules in
cutaneous inflammation and neoplasia. J Cutan Pathol
19:161, 1992.
79. Wassom DL, Grieve RB: In vitro measurement of
canine and feline IgE: Review of FCE RIa-based assays for detection of allergen-reactive IgE. Vet Dermatol 9:173, 1998.
80. Williams IR, et al: Cytokines and chemokines. In:
Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999, p. 384.
81. Wolfe JH, Halliwell REW: Total hemolytic complement values in normal and diseased dog populations.
Vet Immunol Immunopatholl:287, 1980.
82. Yager JA: The skin as an immune organ. In: Ihrke PJ,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 3.
83. Yager JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
Jubb KVF, et al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals IV. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p. 531.
84. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathology of the Dog and Cat. Wolfe, Spain,
1994.
85. Yager JA: The skin as an immune organ. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1996, p. 3.
86. Zunic M, et al: Immune responses in the lymphoid
organs of dogs with experimentally induced IgE-mediated allergy. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 13:78, 1997.

Allergic Therapy
87. A1am R, et al: Selective inhibition of the cutaneous
late but not immediate allergic response to antigens
by misoprostol, a PGE analog-results of a doubleblind placebo-controlled study. Am Rev Respir Dis
148:1066-1070, 1993.
87a. Beale KM, et al: Safety of long-term administration
of a 0.01% f1uocinolone shampoo in allergic dogs. Vet
Dermatol 11:3, 2000.
88. Beningo KE, et al: Observations on the use of tetracycline and niacinamide as antipruritic agents in
atopic dogs. Can Vet J 40:268, 1999.
89. Betttenay SV: Feline atopy. In: Bonagura JD (ed):
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2000, p. 564.
90. Bierman CW, et al: Effect of HI receptor blockade
on late cutaneous reactions to antigen: A double-blind
controlled study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 87:151,
1991.
91. Bloom PB: Hydroxyzine poisoning in 3 dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil
Vet DermatoI15:29, 1999.
92. Boeckh A: Misoprostol. Comp Cont Educ Small
Anim Pract 21:66, 1999.
93. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Double-blind comparison of
three concentrated essential fatty acid supplements in
the management of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 4:
185, 1994.
94. Bond R, Lloyd DH: A double-blind comparison of
olive oil and a combination of evening primrose oil
and fish oil in the management of chronic atopy. Vet
Rec 131:558, 1992.
95. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Randomized Single-blind comparison of an evening primrose oil and fish oil combination and concentrates of these oils in the management of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 3:215, 1992.
96. Bond R, Lloyd DH: Combined treatment with con-

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 653
centrated essential fatty acids and prednisone in the
management of canine atopy. Vet Rec 134:30, 1994.
97. Rees CA, et al: Disposition and hematologic effects of
a single intravenous or oral dose pentoxifylline administration in normal dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 15:89,
1999.
98. Boguniewicz M, Leung DYM: Atopic dermatitis. In:
Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 1123.
99. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of oral sunflower oil on
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentration profiles
in seborrheic dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:29, 1992.
100. Chalmers SA, Medleau L: Feline atopic dermatitis:
Its diagnosis and treatment. Vet Med 89:342, 1994.
101. Chew DJ, et al: Amitriptyline treatment for severe
recurrent idiopathic cystitis in cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 213:1282, 1998.
102. Clayton MH, et al: Altered glucocorticoid receptor
binding in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
96:421, 1995.
103. DeBoer DJ, et al: Inability of short-duration treatment with a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor to reduce clinical
signs of canine atopy. Vet Dermatol 5:13, 1994.
104. Estelle F, Simons R: Anithistamines. In: Middleton
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V.
Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 612.
105. Garcia G, et al: Inhibition of histamine release from
dispersed canine skin mast cells by cyclosporine A,
rolipran and salbutamol, but not by dexamethasone or
sodium cromoglycate. Vet Dermatol 9:81, 1998.
106. Granlund H, et al: Long-term follow-up of eczema
patients treated with cyclosporine. Acta Dermatol Venerol 78:40-43, 1998.
107. Harvey RG: personal communication, 1990.
108. Harvey RG: Management of feline miliary dermatitis
by supplementing the diet with essential fatty acids.
Vet Rec 128:326, 1991.
109. Harvey RG: Effect of varying proportions of evening
primrose oil and fish oil on cats with crusting dermatosis ("miliary dermatitis"). Vet Rec 133:208, 1993.
110. Harvey RG: A comparison of evening primrose oil
and sunflower oil for the management of papulocrustous dermatitis in cats. Vet Rec 133:571, 1993.
111. Harvey RG: A blinded, placebo-controlled study of
the efficacy of borage seed oil and fish oil in the
management of canine atopy. Vet Rec 144:405, 1999.
112. Heripret D: Les antiprurigineux non steroidiens. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 28:73, 1993.
113. Heripret D, Vroom M: Antipruritic therapy. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 417.
114. Lim KK, et al: Cyclosporine in the treatment of dermatologic disease: An update. Mayo Clin Proc 71:
1183-1191, 1996.
115. Logas DB, Kunkle GA: Double-blinded study examining the effects of evening primrose oil on feline pruritic dermatitis. Vet Dermatol 4:181, 1993.
116. Logas DB, Kunkle GA: Double-blinded crossover
study with marine oil supplement containing highdose eicosapentaenoic acid for the treatment of canine pruritic skin disease. Vet DermatoI5:99, 1994.
117. Lloyd DH, Thomsett LR: Essential fatty acid supplementation in the treatment of canine atopy: A preliminary study. Vet Dermatol 1:41, 1989.
118. Lloyd DH: Essential fatty acids and skin disease. J
Small Anirn Pract 30:207, 1989.

119. Marsella R, et al: Use of pentoxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reactions to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
1997.
120. Marsella R: Effects of ketoconazole on intradermal
skin test and leukotriene C4 concentration in the skin
of atopic dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 549.
120a. McAnulty JF, Lensmeyer GL: The effects of ketoconazole on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine A
in cats. Vet Surg 28:448, 1999.
121. Messinger LM: Therapy for feline dermatoses. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:981, 1995.
122. Miller WH Jr: Fatty acid supplements as anti-inflammatory agents. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989,
p.563.
123. Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
in the management of canine and feline pruritus. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989, P: 566.
124. Miller WH Jr, et al: Clinical trial of DVM Derm
Caps in the treatment of allergic disease in dogs: A
nonblinded study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:163,
1989.
125. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Efficacy of chlorpheniramine maleate for the management of pruritus in cats.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:67, 1990.
126. Miller WH Jr, et al: Investigation on the antipruritic
effects of ascorbic acid given alone and in combination with a fatty acid supplement to dogs with allergic
skin disease. Canine Pract 17:11, 1992.
127. Miller WH Jr, et al: Nonsteroidal management of
canine pruritus with amitriptyline. Cornell Vet 82:53,
1992.
128. Miller WH Jr, et al: Efficacy of DVM Derm Caps
Liquid in the management of allergic and inflammatory dermatoses of the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
29:37, 1993.
129. Miller WH Jr, et al: A clinical trial on the efficacy of
clemastine in the management of allergic pruritus in
dogs. Can Vet J 34:25, 1993.
130. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Medical management of
chronic pruritus. Comp Cont Educ 16:449, 1994.
131. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Clemastine fumarate as an
antipruritic agent in pruritic cats: Results of an open
clinical trial. Can Vet J 35:502, 1994.
132. Olivry T, et al: Treatment of canine atopic dermatitis
with misoprostol, a prostaglandin E 1 analogue: An
open study. J Dermatol Treat 8:243-247, 1997.
133. Otto CM, Greentree WF: Terfenadine toxicosis in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1004, 1994.
134. Pan PY, et al: The effects of short term treatment
with the prostaglandin El (PGE1) analog misoprostol
on inflammatory mediator production in murine lupus
nephritis. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 75:125-130,
1995.
135. Paradis M, et al: Further investigations on the use of
nonsteroidal and steroidal anti-inflammatory agents in
the management of canine pruritus. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:44, 1991.
136. Paradis M, et al: The efficacy of clemastine (Tavist), a
fatty acid-containing product (DVM Derm Caps), and
the combination of both products in the management
of canine pruritus. Vet Dermato12:17, 1991.
137. Paradis M, Bettenay S: Nonsteroidal antipruritic
drugs in small animals. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Ad-

654 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
vances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p. 429.
138. Paterson S: Use of antihistamines to control pruritus
in atopic dogs. J Small Anim Pract 35:415, 1994.
139. Patterson S: Additive benefits of EFAs in dogs with
atopic dermatitis after partial response to antihistamine therapy. J Small Anim Pract 36:389, 1995.
139a. Reich MR, et al: Electrocardiographic assessment of
antianxiety medication in dogs and correlation with
serum drug concentration. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:
1571,2000.
140. Scarff DH, Lloyd DH: Double blind, placebo controlled, crossover study of evening primrose oil in the
treatment of canine atopy. Vet Rec 131:97, 1992.
141. Scarff DH, ct al: A multicenter placebo-controlled
practitioner study to investigate the effect of evening
primrose oil in canine atopic dermatosis. In: Von
Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia,
1990, p. 481.
142. Schick RO, et al: Efficacy of an omega-3 fatty acid
adjusted diet in pruritic dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 12:
245, 1995.
143. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine pruritus. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:425, 1988.
144. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal management
of canine pruritus: Chlorpheniramine and a fatty acid
supplement (DVM Derm Caps) in combination, and
the fatty acid supplement at twice the manufacturer's
recommended dosage. Cornell Vet 80:381, 1990.
145. Scott DW, et al: Failure of cyproheptadine hydrochloride as an antipruritic agent in allergic dog: Results of a double-blinded, placebo-controlled study.
Cornell Vet 82:247, 1992.
146. Scott DW, et al: Comparison of the clinical efficacy
of two commercial fatty acid supplements (Efa Vet
and DVM Derm Caps), evening primrose oil, and
cold water marine fish oil in the management of allergic pruritus in dogs: A double-blinded study. Cornell
Vet 82:319, 1992.
146a. Scott DW, Cayatte SM: Failure of papaverine hydrochloride and doxycycline hyclate as antipruritic agents
in pruritic dogs: Results of an open clinical trial. Can
Vet J 34:164, 1993.
147. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Medical management of
allergic pruritus in the cat, with emphasis on feline
atopy. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:103, 1993.
148. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine allergic pruritus. J S Afr Vet Assoc 64:52, 1993.
149. Scott DW, et al: Failure of terfenadine as antipruritic
agent in atopic dogs: Results of a double-blinded,
placebo-controlled study. Can Vet J 35:286, 1994.
150. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: The combination of an
antihistamine (chlorpheniramine) and an omega3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing product (DVM Denn
Caps liquid) for the management of pruritic cats.
Results of an open clinical trial. N Z Vet J 43:29,
1995.
151. Scott DW, et al: Effect of an omega-3/omega-6 fatty
acid-containing commercial lamb and rice diet on
pruritus in atopic dogs: Results of a single-blinded
study. Can J Vet Res 61:145, 1997.
152. Scott DW, et al: Observations on the use of cyproheptadine hydrochloride as an antipruritic agent in
allergic cats. Can Vet J 39:634, 1998.
153. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Antihistamines in the man-

agement of allergic pruritus in dogs and cats. J Small
Anim Pract 40:359, 1999.
154. Shoulberg N: The efficacy of f1uoxetine (Prozac) in
the treatment of acral lick and allergic inhalant dermatitis in canines. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 6:31, 1990.
155. Simon FE, Simon KJ: Antihistamines. In: Middleton
E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice IV.
Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
1.56. Thomas RC, Logas D: Effects of a 1% hydrocortisone
conditioner in hematological and biochemical parameters, adrenil function testing, and cutaneous reaction
to histamine in normal and pruritic dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:109, 1999.
157. Toyoda M, Morohashi M: Morphological assessment
of the effects of cyclosporine A on mast cell- nerve
relationship in atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol Venerol 78:321-325, 1998.
158. Turek JJ, Hayek MG: Effect of omega-6:omega 3
fatty acid ratios on cytokine production in adult and
geriatric dogs. In: Reinhart GA, Carey DP (eds): Recent Advances in Canine and Feline Nutrition II.
Orange Frazer Press, Wilmington, OH, 1998, p. 305.
159. Umesh KG, et al: Evaluation of terfendaine and hydroxyzine as antipruritic agents in dogs. Indian Vet J
75:345, 1998.
160. van Joost T, et al: Cyclosporine in atopic dermatitis. J
Am Acad Dermatol 27:922, 1992.
161. Vaughn OM, et al: Evaluation of effects of dietary
n-6 to n-3 fatty acids ratios on leukotriene B synthesis
in dog skin and neutrophils. Vet Dermatol 5: 163,
1994.
162. White P: Essential fatty acids: Use in management of
canine atopy. Comp Cont Educ 15:451, 1993.

Urticaria and Angioedema
163. Nichols PR, et al: A retrospective study of canine and
feline cutaneous vasculitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 14:27,
1998.
164. Noxon JO: Anaphylaxis, urticaria, and angioedema.
Semin Vet Med Surg 6:26,5, 1991.
165. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: literature review and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
1998.
166. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the dog: Literature review and
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
1999.
167. Soter NA: Urticaria and angioedema. In: Freedberg
1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dennatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 1409.
168. Vitale CB, et al: Putative diethylcarbamazine-induced
urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in a dog. Vet
Dermatol 5:197, 1994.
169. Wolfrom E, et al: Chronic urticaria and Toxocara
canis infection: A case-study. Ann Dermatol Venereol
123:240, 1996.

Canine Atopy
General
170. Auxilia ST, Hill PB: Mast cell distribution in normal
dog skin: A possible explanation for the predilection
sites of atopic dermatitis. Proceedings of the British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Birmingham,
1999, p. 236.
171. Ballauf B: Vergleich von Intrakutan-und Pricktest in
der Allergiediagnostik beim Hund. Tierarztl Prax 19:
428, 1991.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 655
172. Becker AB, et al: Cutaneous mast cell heterogeneity:
Response to antigen in atopic dogs. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 78:937, 1986.
173. Berardesca E, Borroni G: Instrumental evaluation of
cutaneous hydration. Clin Dermatol 13:323, 1995.
174. Bettenay S: A double-blinded trial evaluating homeopathic drops in the treatment of atopy in 20 dogs. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 508.
175. Bevier DE: Long-term management of atopic disease
in the dog. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:
1487, 1990.
176. Boguniewicz, M., Leung DYM: Atopic dermatitis: A
question of balance. Arch Dermatol 134:870, 1998.
177. Bollinger RE, et al: Cat antigen in homes with and
without cats may induce allergic symptoms. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 97:907, 1996.
178. Bos JD, et al: Immune dysregulation in atopic eczema. Arch Dermatol 128:1509, 1992.
179. Bourdeau P, Paragon BM: Alternatives aux corticoides en dermatologie des carnivores. Rev Med Vet
168:645, 1992.
180. Bourdeau P, et al: Relationships between the distribution of lesions and positive intradermal reactions in
307 dogs suspected of atopy and/or flea bite hypersensitivity. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur CoIl Vet Dermatol 15:157, 1998.
181. Brazis P, et al: Comparative study of histamine release from skin mast cells dispersed from atopic, ascaris-sensitive, and healthy dogs. Vet Immmunol ImmunopathoI66:43, 1998.
182. Bruijnzeel-Koumen CAFM, et al: New aspects in the
pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) Suppl 144:58, 1989.
183. Bruijnzeel PLB, et al: The involvement of eosinophils
in the patch test reaction to aeroallergens in atopic
dermatitis: Its relevance for the pathogenesis of
atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy 23:97, 1993.
184. Butler JM, et al: Pruritic dermatitis in asthmatic basenji-greyhound dogs: A model for human atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 8:33, 1983.
185. Campbell KL, et al: Immunoglobulin A deficiency in
the dog. Canine Pract 16:7, 1991.
186. Carlotti DN, Castargent F: Analyse statistique de
tests cutanes positifs chez 449 chiens atteints de dermatite allergique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 27:53,
1992.
187. Carlotti D: La dermatite atopique du chien. Point Vet
17:5, 1985.
188. Carlotti DN: Traitement et suivi au long cours du
chien it dermatite atopique. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 33(Suppl):359, 1998.
189. Carucci JA, et al: The leukotriene antagonist zafirlukast as a therapeutic agent for atopic dermatitis. Arch
Dermatol 134:785, 1998.
190. Chalmers SA, Medieau L: An update on atopic dermatitis in dogs. Vet Med 89:326, 1994.
191. Chan SC, et al: Elevated leukocyte phosphodiesterase
as a basis for depressed cyclic adenosine monophosphate responses in the basenji-greyhound dog model
of asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 76:148, 1985.
192. Chandoga P, et al: The incidence of atopic diseases in
dogs in the Kosice region (Slovakia): Anamnestic and
clinical aspects. Folia Vet 42:159, 1998.
193. Chesney CJ: Measurement of skin hydration in normal dogs and in dogs with atopy or a scaling dermatosis. J Small Anim Pract 36:305, 1995.
194. Ciprandi G, et al: Minimal persistent inflammation is

present at mucosal level in patients with asymptomatic rhinitis and mite allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 96:6, 1995.
195. Codner EC, Lessard P: Comparison of intradermal
allergy test and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
in dogs with allergic skin disease. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 202:739, 1993.
196. Collo MJ, et aI: A controlled trial of house dust mite
eradication using natamycin in homes of patients with
atopic dermatitis: Effect on clinical status and mite
populations. Br J Dermatol 121:199, 1989.
197. Cooper KD: Atopic dermatitis: Recent trends in
pathogenesis and therapy. Dermatol Foundation 102:
128, 1994.
197a. D'Amato G, et al: Clothing is a carrier of cat allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 98:577, 1997.
198. Davis FM: Anti-IgE treatment for allergic diseases.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coll Vet Dermatol 14:57, 1998.
199. Day MJ, et al: Subclass profile of allergen-specific
IgG antibodies in atopic dogs. Res Vet Sci 61:146,
1996.
200. DeBoer DJ: Advances in allergic skin disease. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 147.
201. DeBoer DJ, Hill PB: Serum immunoglobulin E concentrations in West Highland white terrier puppies do
not predict development of atopic dermatitis. Vet
Dermatol 10:275, 1999.
201a. DeMora F, et al: Skin mast cell releasibility in dogs
with atopic dermatitis. Inflam Res 45:424, 1996.
202. De Weck AL, et al: Genetics and regulation of the
IgE response leading to experimentally induced
atopic-like dermatitis in beagle dogs. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet
Dermatol 13:76, 1997.
203. De Weck AL, et al: Dog allergy, a model for allergy
genetics. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 113:55, 1997.
204. De Weck AL, et al: Genetic and environmental aspects of IgE regulation in dogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol
15:111, 1998.
205. Elsner P, et al: Bioengineering of the Skin: Water
and the Stratum Corneum. CRC Press, Boca Raton,
1994.
206. Esch RE: Canine allergy to house dust mites. Vet
Allergy Clin Immunol 5:110, 1997.
207. Ferrer L, et aI: Clinical anti-inflammatory efficacy of
arofylline, a new selective phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor, in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet Rec 145:191,
1999.
208. Fontaine J, Henroteaux M: Utilisation du dosage des
anticorps anaphylactiques (IgG) pour Ie diagnostic
d'atopie chez Ie chien. Ann Med Vet 135:57, 1991.
209. Frank LA, McEntee MF: Demonstration of aeroallergen contact sensitivity in dogs. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 3:75-80, 1995.
210. Frick OL, et aI: Immunoglobulin E antibodies to pollens augmented in dogs by virus vaccines. Am J Vet
Res 44:440, 1983.
211. Frick OL: Pathogenesis of chronic allergic reactions
using the atopic dog as a model. Proc Am Acad Vet
Allergy, 1991.
212. Graham-Brown RAC: Therapeutics in atopic dermatitis. Adv Dermatol 13:3, 1998.
213. Griffin CEo Atopic disease. Semin Vet Med Surg 6:
290, 1991.
214. Griffin CEo Malassezia paronychia in atopic dogs.

656 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet DermatoI12:51, 1996.
214a. Griot-Wenk ME, et al: Total serum IgE and IgA
antibody levels in healthy dogs of different breeds
and exposed to different environments. Res Vet Sci
67:239, 1999.
215. Groeben H, et al: Dermal and airway responses to
monoclonal antibodies specific for canine IgE. Vet
Immunol Immunopathol 58:209, 1997.
216. Halliwell REW, et al: Induced and spontaneous IgE
antibodies to Dermatophagoides farinae in dogs and
cats: Evidence of functional heterogeneity of IgE. Vet
Dermatol 9:179, 1998.
217. Hanifin JM, et al: Recombinant interferon therapy for
atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:189, 1993.
218. Hanifin JM: Biochemical and immunologic mechanisms in atopic dermatitis: New targets for emerging
therapies. J Am Acad Dermatol 41:72, 1999.
219. Harper, J: Traditional Chinese medicine for eczema.
Br Med J 308:489, 1994.
220. Harvey RG, Noble WC: A temporal study comparing
the carriage of Staphylococcus intermedius on normal
dogs with atopic dogs in clinical remission. Vet Dermatol 5:21, 1994.
221. Heripret D: Les antiprurigineux non steroidiens. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 28:73, 1993.
222. Hill PB, et al: Concentrations of total serum IgE,
IgA, and IgG in atopic and parasitized dogs. Vet Immunol ImmunopathoI44:105, 1995.
223. Hill PB, DeBoer DJ: Quantification of serum total
IgE concentration in dogs by use of an enzyme-linked
immunsorbent assay containing monoclonal murineanticanine IgE. Am J Vet Res 55:944, 1994.
224. Hirshman CA, et al: Enhanced bronchoalveolar lavage
mast cells histamine releasibility in allergic dogs with
and without airway hyperresponsiveness. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 81:829, 1988.
225. Hites MJ, et al: Effect of immunotherapy on the
serum concentrations of allergen-specific IgG antibodies in dog sera. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 22:39,
1989.
226. Hofer MF, et al: Staphylococcal toxins augment specific IgE responses by atopic patients exposed to allergen. J Invest Dermatol 112:171, 1999.
227. Jackson HA, et al: Canine leukocyte histamine release: Response to antigen and to anti-IgE. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:195, 1996.
228. Junghans V, et al: Epidermal cytokines 11-1[3, TNF-O',
and IL-12 in patients with atopic dermatitis: Response to application of house dust mite antigens. J
Invest Dermatolll1:1184, 1998.
229. Kapp A, et al: Eosinophil cationic protein in sera of
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol
24:555, 1991.
230. Kapp A, et al: Altered production of immunomodulating cytokines in patients with atopic dermatitis. Acta
Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) 144:97, 1989.
231. Klubal, R, et al: The high-affinity receptor for IgE is
the predominant IgE-binding structure in lesional
skin of atopic dermatitis patients. J Invest Dermatol
108:3, 1997.
232. Langeveld-Wildschut EG, et al: Evaluation of the
atopy patch test and the cutaneous late-phase reaction
as relevant models for the study of allergic inflammation in patients with atopic eczema. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 98:1019, 1996.
233. Leroy BP, et al: A novel therapy for atopic dermatitis
with allergen-antibody complexes: A double-blind,

placebo-controlled study. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:
232, 1993.
234. Leung DYM: Atopic dermatitis: The skin as a window
into the pathogenesis of chronic allergic diseases. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 96:302, 1995.
235. Leung DYM, et al: Atopic dermatitis (atopic eczema).
In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999, p. 1464.
236. Lyon TM, Halliwell REW: Allergen-specific IgE and
IgGd antibodies in atopic and normal dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 66:203, 1998.
237. Magalono-Laruelle C: Sensibilisation it la blatte chez
Ie chien atopique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:
331, 1995.
238. Mao XQ, et al: Association between genetic variants
of mast cell chymase and eczema. Lancet 348:581,
1996.
239. Marsella R, et al: Double-blinded placebo-controlled
cross-over study on the effects of pentoxifylline in
canine atopy. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:91, 1999.
240. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Factors influencing the penetration of bacterial antigens through canine skin. In:
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 370.
241. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: The role of allergy in the
development of canine pyoderma. J Small Anim Pract
30:216, 1992.
242. McEwan NA: Bacterial adherence to canine comeocytes. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindal!, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 454.
243. Morris DO, et al: Type-l hypersensitivity responses to
Malassezia pachydermatis extracts in atopic dogs.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 13:74, 1997.
244. Mudde GC, et al: IgE positive Langerhans' cells and
Th2 allergen specific T cells in atopic dermatitis. J
Invest Dermatol 99:103, 1992.
245. Mudde GC, et al: Advances in the pathogenesis and
therapy of atopic dermatitis in humans and dogs.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet DermatoI14:41, 1998.
246. Mudde GC, et al: Allergen presentation by epidermal
Langerhans' cells from patients with atopic dermatitis
is mediated by IgE. Immunology 69:335, 1990.
247. Mueller RS: Diagnosis and management of canine
atopic disease. Aust Vet Practit 23:20, 1993.
247a. Mueller RS, et al: Serum and skin IgA concentrations in normal and atopic dogs. Aust Vet J 75:906,
1997.
248. Muse R, et al: The prevalence of otic manifestations
and otitis externa in allergic dogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
12:33, 1996.
249. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: In vitro lymphocyte stimulation by concanavalin A and with histamine as a comitogen in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 28:67, 1991.
250. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Abnormal cutaneous response to mitogens and a contact allergen in dogs
with atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
28:97, 1991.
251. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Altered spontaneous and histamine-induced in vitro suppressor-cell function in

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 657
dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 30:129, 1992.
252. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Changes in cell-mediated immune responses after experimentally-induced anaphylaxis in dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 32:325,
1992.
253. Nimmo-Wilkie JS, et al: Morphometric analyses of
the skin of dogs with atopic dermatitis and correlations with cutaneous and plasma histamine and total
serum IgE. Vet Pathol 27:179, 1990.
254. Nuttal TJ: Malassezia specific IgE levels in normal
and atopic dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur Soc Vet
Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 15:155, 1998.
255. Ohlen BM: Diagnostiering och behandling vid atopi
hos hund i Sverige. Svensk Veterinar 44:299, 1992.
256. Olivry T, et al: Langerhans' cell hyperplasia and IgE
expression in canine atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol. Res. 288:579-585, 1996.
257. Olivry T, et al: Characterization of the cutaneous inflammatory infiltrate in canine atopic dermatitis. Am J
Dermatopathol 19:477-486, 1997.
258. Olivry T, et al: Characterization of the cutaneous inflammatory infiltrate during IgE-mediated late-phase
reactions in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 14:71, 1998.
259. Olivry T, et al: Toward a canine model of atopic
dermatitis: amplification of cytokine-gene transcripts
in the skin of atopic dogs. Exper Dermatol 8:204,
1999.
260. Peng Z, et al: Measurement of ragweed-specific IgE
in canine serum by use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays containing polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies. Am J Vet Res 54:239, 1993.
261. Peng Z, et al: Heterogeneity of polyclonal IgE characterized by differential charge, affinity to protein A,
and antigenicity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 100:87,
1997.
262. Reference deleted.
263. Prelaud P, Sainte-Laudy J: Dermatite atopique du
chien: Methodes de dtagnostic in vitro. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 23:441, 1988.
264. Prelaud P, Sainte-Laudy J: IgG specifiques de
l'acarien de la poussiere de maison, Dermatophagoides [arinae, chez les chiens atopiques et nonatopiques. Rev Med Vet 140:1117, 1989.
265. Prelaud P: Traitement de l'atopie canine. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 28:461, 1993.
266. Prelaud P, et al: Reevaluation of diagnostic criteria of
canine atopic dermatitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur
Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 14:169,
1997.
267. Prelaud P, Olivry T: Ettopathogenie de la dermatite
atopique canine. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
33(Suppl):315, 1998.
268. Prelaud P: Diagnostic de la dermatite atopique canine: Un diagnostic clinique. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 33(Suppl):331, 1998.
269. Prinz B, et al: Long-term application of extracorporeal photochemotherapy in severe atopic dermatitis, J
Am Acad DermatoI40:577, 1999.
270. Racine BP, et al: Influence of sex and age on serum
total immunoglobulin E concentration in beagles. Am
J Vet Res 60:93, 1999.
271. Reinhold U, et al: Systemic interferon treatment in
severe atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 29:58,
1993.

272. Rhodes KH, et al: Comparative aspects of canine and
human atopic dermatitis. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:166,
1987.
273. Rhodes KH, et al: Investigation into the immunopathogenesis of canine atopy. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:199,
1987.
274. Rokugo M, et al: Contact sensitivity to Pityrosporum
ovale in patients with atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 126:627, 1990.
275. Ruzicka T: Atopic eczema between rationality and
irrationality. Arch Dermatol 134:1462, 1998.
276. Sager N, et al: House dust mite specific reactivity in
the skin of subjects with atopic dermatitis: Frequency
and lymphokine profile in the allergen patch test. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 89:801, 1992.
277. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Canine atopic dermatitis
in Greece: Clinical observations and the prevalence of
positive intradermal test reactions in 91 spontaneous
cases. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:61, 1999.
278. Saridomichelakis MN, et al: Sensitization to dust
mites in cats with Otodectes cynotis infestation. Vet
Dermatol 10:89, 1999.
279. Schick RO, Fadok VA: Responses of atopic dogs to
regional allergens: 268 cases (1981-1984). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 189:1493, 1986.
280. Schwartzman RM: Immunologic studies of progeny of
atopic dogs. Am J Vet Res 45:375, 1984.
281. Schwartzman RM, et al: The atopic dog model: Report of an attempt to establish a colony. Int Arch
Allergy Appl Immunol 72:97, 1983.
282. Scott DW: Observations on canine atopy. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 17:91, 1981.
283. Scott DW, Paradis M: A survey of canine and feline
skin disorders seen in a university practice: Small Animal Clinic, University of Montreal, Saint-Hyacinthe,
Quebec, (1987-1988). Can Vet J 31:830, 1990.
284. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study of the efficacy of
two commercial veterinary pramoxine cream rinses in
the management of pruritus in atopic dogs. Canine
Pract 25:15, 2000.
285. Shaw SC: The role of house dust mite allergens in
canine allergic disease. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 505.
286. Sinke JD, et al: Immunophenotyping of skin-infiltrating T-cell subsets in dogs with atopic dermatitis. Vet
Immunol Immunopathol 57:13, 1997.
287. Skov L, Baadsgaard 0: Superantigens: Do they have
a role in skin diseases? Arch Dermatol 131:829,
1995.
288. Solomon, W. R, Platts-Mills TAE: Aerobiology and
inhalant allergens. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. MeGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p. 367.
289. Sousa CA: Atopic dermatitis. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 18:1049, 1988.
290. Sousa CA, Norton AL: Advances in methodology for
diagnosis of allergic skin disease. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 20:1419, 1990.
291. Sporik R, et al: Exposure to house-dust mite allergen
(der p I) and the development of asthma in childhood: A prospective study. N Engl J Med 323:502,
1990.
292. Stevens SR, et al: Long-term effectiveness and safety
of recombinant human interferon gamma therapy for
atopic dermatitis despite unchanged serum IgE levels.
Arch Dermatol 134:799, 1998.

658 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
293. Stiller MJ, et al: A double-blind, placebo-controlled
clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of
thymopentin as an adjunctive treatment in atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 30:597, 1994.
294. Tan BB, et al: Double-blind controlled trial of effect
of house dust-mite allergen avoidance on atopic dermatitis. Lancet 347:15, 1996.
295. Tanaka Y, et al: Immunohistochemical studies on dust
mite antigen in positive reaction site of patch test.
Acta Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) Suppl 144:93, 1989.
296. Tangbel 0, et al: The fatty acid profile of subcutaneous fat and blood plasma in pruritic dogs and dogs
without skin problems. Can J Vet Res 62:275, 1998.
297. Thepen T, et al: Biphasic response against aeroallergen in atopic dermatitis showing a switch from initial
Th2 response to a Thl response in situ: An immunocytochemical study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 97:828,
1996.
298. Tupker RA, et al: Induction of atopic dermatitis by
inhalation of house dust mite. J Allergy Clin Immunol
97:1064, 1996.
299. Turner CR, et al: Dermal mast cell releasibility and
end organ responsiveness in atopic and nonatopic
dogs. J Allergy Clin Immunol 83:643, 1989.
300. Umesh KG, et al: Epidemiological and therapeutic
aspects of canine atopy. Indian Vet J 72:56, 1995.
301. van der Heijden FL, et al: High frequency of IL-4
producing CD4+ allergen-specific T lymphocytes in
atopic dermatitis lesional skin. J Invest Dermatol 97:
389, 1991.
302. van den Broek AHM, Simpson JW: Fat absorption in
dogs with atopic dermatitis. In: von Tschamer C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Balltere-Tlndall, Philadelphia, 1990, P: 155.
303. Van Stee EW: Risk factors in canine atopy. Calif Vet
37:8, 1983.
304. Vollset I, ct al: Immediate type hypersensitivity in
dogs induced by storage mites. Res Vet Sci 40:123,
1986.
304a. Vriesendorp HM, et al: Serological DLA typing of
normal and atopic dogs. Transplant Proc 7:375, 1975.
305. Welle MM, et al: Mast cell density and subtypes in
the skin of dogs with atopic dermatitis. J Comp
Pathol 120:187, 1999.
306. White SD, Bourdeau P: L'atopic chez le chien: Donnees actualisees, Point Vet 27:191, 1995.
307. White SD, et al: Comparison via cytology and culture
of carriage of Malassezia pachydennatis in atopic and
healthy dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, 1998, p. 291.
308. Willemse A: Canine atopic disease: Investigations of
eosinophils and the nasal mucosa. Am J Vet Res 45:
1867, 1984.
309. Willemse A, van den Brom WE: Investigations of the
symptomatology and the significance of immediate
skin test reactivity in canine atopic dermatitis. Res
Vet Sci 34:261, 1983.
310. Willemse A, et al: Allergen specific IgGd antibodies
in dogs with atopic dermatitis as determined by the
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Clin
Exp Immunol 59:359, 1985.
311. Willemse A, et al: Induction of non-IgE anaphylactic
antibodies in dogs. Clin Exp Immunol 59:351, 1985.
312. Willemse A: Atopic skin disease: A review and a reconsideration of diagnostic criteria. J Small Anim
Pract 27:771, 1986.
313. Woodfolk JA, et al: Chemical treatment of carpets to

reduce allergen: Comparison of the effects of tannic
acid and other treatments on proteins derived from
dust mites and cats. J Allergy Clin Immunol 96:3,
1995.
314. Zunic M, et al: Studies of atopy in genetically high
IgE responder dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 14:53,
1998.

Testing
315. Alaba 0: Allergies in dogs and cats: Allergen-specific
IgE determination by VARL Liquid Gold compared
with ELISAIRAST. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:93,
1997.
316. Ackerman L: Diagnosing inhalant allergies: Intradermal or in vitro testing. Vet Med 83:779, 1988.
317. Anderson RK, Sousa CA: In vitro versus in vivo testing for canine atopy. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p. 425.
318. August JR: The intradermal test as a diagnostic aid
for canine atopic disease. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:
164, 1982.
319. August JR: The reaction of canine skin to the intradermal injection of allergenic extracts. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 18:157, 1982.
320. Barbet JL, Halliwell REW: Duration of inhibition of
the immediate skin test reactivity by hydroxyzine hydrochloride in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1565,
1989.
321. Beale KM, et al: Effects of sedation on intradermal
skin testing in flea-allergic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
197:861, 1990.
322. Bevier DE, et al: FCE RIa-based ELISA technology
for in vitro determination of allergen-specific IgE in a
population of intradermal skin-tested normal and
atopic dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19(5uppl):
10, 1997.
323. Bond R, et al: Evaluation of two enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for the diagnosis of canine atopy.
Vet Rec 135:130, 1994.
324. Bourdeau P, et al: Positive skin reactions to allergenic
challenge in healthy dogs: Part I-Intradermal skin
testing. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, P: 444.
325. Bourdeau P, Blumstein P: Nonspecific sensitization to
house dust mites in dogs: A study of 170 intradermal
skin testing to Blomia tropicalis in France. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 15:19, 1999.
325a. Bunde CJW, et al: Comparison of intradermal skin
testing and a new ELISA for specific IgE. Vet Allergy
Clin Immunol 5:1, 1997.
326. Campbell KL, Hall IA: Effect of storage of allergens
in plastic and glass syringes on the results of intradermal skin testing in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:48,
1993.
327. Codner EC, et al: Effect of tiletamine-zolazepam sedation on intradermal allergy testing in atopic dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1857, 1992.
328. Codner EC, McGrath CJ: The effect of tiletaminezolazepam anesthesia on the response to intradermally injected histamine. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:
189, 1991.
329. Codner EC, Lessard P: Effect of hyposensitization
with irrelevant antigens on subsequent allergy skin

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 659
test results in normal dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:209,
1992.
330. Codner EC, Tinker MK: Reactivity to intradermal
injections of extracts of house dust and house dust
mite in healthy dogs and dogs suspected of being
atopic. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:812, 1995.
331. Codner EC, Griffin CEo Serologic allergy testing for
dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:237, 1996.
332. Curtis CF, et al: Evaluation of the response to intradermally injected environmental mite allergen solutions in healthy kenneled dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et
aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III.
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 510.
333. Darsow U, et aI: Evaluating the relevance of aeroallergen sensitization in atopic eczema with the atopy
patch test: A randomized, double-blind multicenter
study. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:187, 1999.
334. DeBoer DJ: Survey of intradermal skin testing practices in North America. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:
1357, 1989.
335. Derer M, et aI: Monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies in the
diagnosts of dog allergy. Vet Dermatol 9:185, 1998.
336. Esch RE, et aI: Isolation and characterization of a
major dust mite (Dermatophagoides jarinae) allergenic fraction in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 13:87,
1997.
337. Esch RE, Grier TJ: Clinical utility of in vitro canine
IgE assays. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:31, 1997.
338. Evans AG: Allergic inhalant dermatitis attributable to
marijuana exposure in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
195:1588, 1989.
339. Ferguson EA: A review of intradermal skin testing in
the UK. Vet Dermatol Newsl 14:13, 1992.
340. Frank LA, et aI: Comparison of serum cortisol concentration before and after intradermal testing in sedated and nonsedated dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:507, 1992.
341. Ginel PJ, et aI: Correlation between intradermal and
in-hospital serological testing in atopic dogs. In:
Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 441.
342. Ginel PJ, et aI: Evaluation of a commercial ELISA
test for the detection of allergen-specific IgE antibodies in atopic dogs. J Vet Med B 45:421, 1998.
343. Griffin CEo In vitro versus in vivo testing for atopy.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
CoIl Vet Dermatol 12:50, 1996.
344. Griffin CEo RAST and ELISA testing in canine atopy.
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X.
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1989, p. 592.
345. Griffin CE, et aI: The effect of serum IgE on an in
vitro ELISA test in the normal canine. In: von
Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia,
1990, p. 137.
346. Griot-Wenk ME, et aI: Characterization of two dog
IgE-specific antibodies elicited by different recombinant fragments of the epsilon chain in hens. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 64:15, 1998.
347. Cuaguere E, et aI: Canine atopy: In vitro testing
using a monoclonal anti-IgE. In: Kwochka KW, et aI
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 454.
348. Halliwell REW, Kunkle GA: The radioallergosorbent
test in the diagnosis of canine atopic disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol 62:236, 1978.

349. Halliwell REW: Canine allergic skin diseases. Proc
Kal Kan Symp Treat Small Anim Dis 11:33, 1987.
350. Hammerberg B, et aI: Auto-lgG anti-IgE and Ig X
IgE immune complex presence and effects on
ELISA-based quantitation of IgE in canine atopic
dermatitis, demodectic acariasis and helminthiasis.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 60:33, 1997.
351. Hammerling, R., de Week AL: Comparison of two
diagnostic tests for canine atopy using monoclonal
anti-IgE antibodies. Vet Dermatol 9:191, 1998.
352. Johnson CA: The effects of constant and variable
temperature on the biological activity of allergens
stored in plastic and glass syringes. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol
11:18, 1995.
353. Kleinbeck ML, et aI: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay for measurement of allergen-specific IgE antibodies in canine serum. Am J Vet Res 50:1831, 1989.
354. Koch HJ, Peters S: 207 Intrakutnatests bei Hunden
mit Verdacht auf atopische dermatitis. Kleinterpraxis
39:25, 1994.
355. Kunkle G, et aI: Steroid effects on intradermal skin
testing in sensitized dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol1O:41,
1994.
356. Lyon TM, Halliwell REW: Allergen-specific IgE and
IgGd antibodies in atopic and normal dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 66:203, 1998.
357. MacDonald JM, Angarano DW: Comparison of intradermal testing with commercial in vitro allergy testing
(ELISA) in parasitized nonallergic beagle dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl
Vet Dermatol 6:46, 1990.
358. Marsella R, et aI: Double-blinded pilot study on the
effects of ketoconazole on intradermal skin test and
leukotriene C4 concentration in the skin of atopic
dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:3, 1997.
359. Mason IS, Lloyd DH: Evaluation of compound 48/80
as a model of immediate hypersensitivity in the skin
of dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:81, 1996.
359a. Masuda K, et aI: Positive reactions to common allergens in 42 atopic dogs in Japan. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 73:193, 2000.
359b. Masuda K, et aI: IgE sensitivity and cross-reactivity
to crude and purified mite allergens (Derfl, Derf2,
Derp1, Derp2) in atopic dogs sensitive to Dermatophagoides mite allergens. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 72:303, 2000.
360. McCall C: One years experience with IgE Fc RI
testing. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 14:51, 1998.
361. McCall C, et aI: Characterization and cloning of the
major house dust mite (Dermatophagoides jarinae)
allergen for dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 15:111, 1999.
362. Miller WH Jr, et aI: Evaluation of an allergy screening test for use in atopic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:931, 1992.
363. Miller WH Jr, et aI: Evaluation of the performance of
a serologic allergy system in atopic dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 29:545, 1993.
364. Miller WH Jr, et aI: The influence of oral corticosteroids or declining allergen exposure on serologic allergy test results. Vet Dermatol 3:327, 1992.
365. Mills AC, McKeever PJ: Comparison of intradermal
skin testing in non-sedated and sedated dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil
Vet Dermatol 10:46, 1994.

660 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
366. Moriello KA, Eicker SW: Influence of sedative and
anesthetic agents on intradermal skin test reactions in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:1484, 1991.
367. Mueller RS, et al: Comparison of intradermal testing
and serum testing for allergen-specific IgE using
monoclonal IgE antibodies in 84 atopic dogs. Aust
Vet J 77:90, 1999.
368. Noli, C. et al.: The significance of reactions to purified fractions of Demw.tophagoides pteronyssinus and
Demw.tophagoides farinae in canine atopic dermatitis.
Vet Immunol ImmunopathoI52:147, 1996.
369. Noli C: Specificite de I' allergie aux acariens de la
poussiere de maison chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 33(Suppl):305, 1998.
370. Ohlen BM: Projekt alIergitester i Sverige. Svensk Veterinar 44:365, 1992.
371. Paradis M, Lecuyer M: Evaluation of an in-office allergy screening test in nonatopic dogs having various
intestinal parasites. Can Vet J 34:293, 1993.
372. Phillips MK, et al: Cutaneous histamine reactivity,
histamine content of commercial allergens, and potential for false-positive skin test reactions in dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1288, 1993.
373. Plant JD: The reproducibility of three in vitro canine
allergy tests: A pilot study. Proc Annu Memb Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 10:16,
1994.
374. Prelaud P: Tests cutanes d'allergie immediate chez Ie
chien: Minimiser erreurs et deceptions. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 27:529, 1992.
375. Prelaud P, Cuaguere E: Sensitization to the house
dust mite Dermatophagoides farinae in dogs with sarcoptic mange. Vet Dermatol 6:205, 1995.
376. Prelaud P: Methodes de diagnostic biologique en allergologie canine. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
33(Suppl):281, 1998.
377. Prost C: Allergy diagnosis in companion animals:
Clinical experience with the basophil activation
model. Vet Dermatol 9:213, 1998.
378. Rachofsky MA: Comments on in vitro allergy testing.
Dermatol Dialogue, Winter 1993/1994, p. 4.
379. Rees CA, et al: The effects of temperature and type
of syringe on the biologic activity of stored allergens.
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:12, 1997.
380. Saint-Laudy J: Passive antibody transfer on human
leukocytes: Application to small animal allergy diagnosis by flow cytometry. Vet Dermatol 9:213, 1998.
381. Sainte-Laudy J, Prost C: Binding of canine anaphylactic antibodies on human basophils: Application to canine allergy diagnosis. Vet Dermatol 7:185, 1996.
382. Schmeitzel LP: The effects of multiple intradermal
skin tests on skin reactivity. Vet Allergy, Summer
1986, p. 1.
383. Schwartzman RM, Lillard S: Polyclonal anti-IgE antibody results in an allergen-specific ELISA. Canine
Pract 20:17, 1995.
384. Schwartzman RM: The ELISA as an aid to the diagnosis of canine atopic disease. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 3:81-90, 1995.
385. Shaw SC: The role of house dust mite allergens in
canine allergic disease. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 505.
386. Sture GH, et al: Canine atopic disease: the prevalence of positive intradermal skin tests at two sites in
the north and south of Great Britain. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 44:293, 1995.
387. Vogelnest LJ, et al: The suitability of Domitor (rnede-

tomldine) sedation for facilitating intradermal skin
testing in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet DermatoI14:37, 1998.
388. Wassom DL: Principles and history of the Fe epsilon
Receptor (FceRI) for IgE detection. Comp Cont
Educ Pract Vet 19(5uppl):6, 1997.
389. Wassom DL, Grieve RB: In vitro measurement of
canine and feline IgE: Review of FCE RIa-based assays for detection of allergen-reactive IgE. Vet Dermatol 9:173, 1998.
390. Wellington J, et al: Determination of skin threshold
concentration of an aqueous house dust mite allergen
in normal dogs. Cornell Vet 81:37, 1991.
391. Wellington JR, et al: Demw.tophagoides mites in
house dust as an allergen source in atopic dogs. Cornell Vet 81:429, 1991.
392. Willis EL, Kunkle GA: Intradermal reactivity to various insect and arachnid allergens in dogs from the
southeastern United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
1431, 1996.
393. Willemse A, van den Brom WE: Evaluation of the
intradermal allergy test in normal dogs. Res Vet Sci
32:57, 1982.
394. Zunic M: Comparison between IMMUNODOT tests
and the intradermal skin test in atopic dogs. Vet Dermatol 9:201, 1998.
395. Zunic M, Honel A: Diagnosis of canine atopy: In
vitro testing using CMG IMMUNODOT. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
DermatoI13:39, 1997.

Hyposensitization
396. Angarano DW, MacDonald JM: Immunotherapy in
canine atopy. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1991, p. 505.
397. DesRoches A: Specific immunotherapy prevents the
onset of new sensitization in monosensitized children.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 95(1):309, 1995.
398. Ferguson EA: A retrospective comparison of the success of two different hyposensitization protocols in
the management of canine atopy. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp 16:26, 1994.
399. Garfield RA: Injection immunotherapy in the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis: Comparison of 3
hyposensitization protocols. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 8:7,
1992.
400. Griffin CEo Hyposensitization. Calif Vet 52:1, 1998.
401. McDonald JM: Rush hyposensitization in the treatment of canine atopy. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:95,
1999.
402. Mueller RS, Bettenay SV: Long-term immunotherapy
in 146 dogs with atopic dermatitis-a retrospective
study. Aust Vet Practit 26:128, 1996.
403. Nelson HS: Immunotherapy for inhalant allergens. In:
Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V. C.V. Mosby, St. Louis, 1998, p. 1050.
404. Nuttal TJ: A retrospective survey of hyposensitization
therapy. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, p. 507.
405. Reedy LM: Personal experiences with injection immunotherapy. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:99, 1999.
406. Rosenbaum MR, et al: Effects of mold proteases on
the biological activity of allergenic pollen extracts. Am
J Vet Res 57:1447, 1996.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 66 I
407. Rosser EJ: Aqueous hyposensitization in the treatment of canine atopic dermatitis: A retrospective and
prospective study of 100 cases. In: Kwochka KW, et
al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III.
Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 169.
408. Schwartzman RM, Mathis L: Immunotherapy for canine atopic dermatitis: Efficacy in 125 atopic dogs
with vaccine formulations based on ELISA allergy
testing. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:123, 1997.
409. Scott KY, et aI: A retrospective study of hyposensitization in atopic dogs in a flea-scarce environment. In:
Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 79.
410. Scott KA, Rosychuk RAW, et al: Hyposensitization:
The Colorado State University experience with emphasis on efficacy by breed. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:
107, 1999.
411. Wagner R: A retrospective survey of hyposensitization
therapy using low concentrations of alum-precipitated
allergens. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:89, 1998.
412. Willemse A, et al: Effect of hyposensitization on
atopic dermatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:
277, 1984.
413. Willemse T: Hyposensitization of dogs with atopic
dermatitis based on the results of in vivo and in vitro
(lgGd ELISA) diagnostic tests. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
10:61, 1994.

Feline Atopy/Allergic Diseases
414. Bettenay S: Diagnosing and treatment feline atopic
dermatitis. Vet Med 86:488, 1991.
415. Bettenay S: Response to hyposensitization in 29
atopic cats. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, p. 517.
416. Bevier DE: The reaction of feline skin to the intradermal injection of allergenic extracts and passive cutaneous anaphylaxis using the serum from skin test
positive cats. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell
REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I.
Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p. 126.
417. Bevier DE: Effect of methylprednisolone acetate and
oral prednisone on immediate skin test reactivity in
cats. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Am Coll Vet DermatoI1O:45, 1994.
418. Bevier DE, Dunstan S: Ultrastructural changes in feline dermal mast cells during antigen-induced degranulation in vivo. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 213.
419. Carlotti D, Prost C: L'atopie feline. Point Vet 20:777,
1988.
420. Chalmers S, Medleau L: Recognizing the signs of
feline allergic dermatoses. Vet Med 84:388, 1989.
421. Codner EC: Reactivity to intradermal injections of
extracts of house dust mite and flea antigen in normal
cats and cats suspected of being allergic. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 12:26, 1996.
422. Corcoran BM, et aI: Feline asthma syndrome: A retrospective study of the clinical presentation in 19
cats. J Small Anim Pract 36:481, 1995.
423. DeBoer DJ, et aI: Feline IgE: Preliminary evidence
of its existence and cross-reactivity with canine IgE.
In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p. 51.

424. DeBoer DJ, et aI: Monoclonal antibodies against feline immunoglobulin E. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 10:11, 1994.
425. Foster AP, O'Dair H: Allergy testing for skin disease
in the cat: In vivo versus in vitro tests. Vet Dermatol
4:111, 1993.
426. Foster AP, et aI: Studies on the isolation and characterization of a reaginic antibody in a cat. Res Vet Sci
58:70, 1995.
427. Foster AP: A study of the number and distribution of
cutaneous mast cells in cats with disease not affecting
the skin. Vet Dermatol 5:17, 1994.
428. Bevier D, et aI: FCE Ria-based ELISA technology for
in vitro determination of allergen-specific IgE in normal cats and correlation to intradermal skin test results: Preliminary findings. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 19(5uppl):17, 1997.
429. Foster AP, et aI: Allergen-specific IgG antibodies in
cats with allergic skin disease. Res Vet Sci 63:239,
1997.
430. Gilbert S, Halliwell REW: Assessment of an ELISA
for the detection of allergen-specific IgE in cats experimentally sensitized against house dust mites. In:
Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 520.
431. Gilbert S, Halliwell REW: Production and characterization of polyclonal antisera against feline IgE. Vet
Immunol Immunopathol 63:223, 1998.
432. Gilbert S, Halliwell REW: Feline immunoglobulin E:
Induction of antigen-specific antibody in normal cats
and levels in spontaneously allergic cats. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 63:235, 1998.
433. Gilbert S, et aI: L'atopie feline. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 34:15, 1999.
434. Halliwell REW: Efficacy of hyposensitization in feline
allergic diseases based upon results of in vitro testing
for allergen-specific immunoglobulin E. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 33:3, 1997.
435. Koeman JP, et aI: Quantity and distribution of mast
cells and eosinophils in feline allergic miliary dermatitis. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 480.
436. McDougal BJ: Allergy testing and hyposensitization
for three common feline dermatoses. Mod Vet Pract
67:629, 1986.
437. Mueller RS, et aI: Effect of tiletamine-zolazepam anesthesia on the response to intradermally injected histamine in cats, Vet Dermatol 2:119, 1991.
438. Mueller RS: Diagnosis and management of feline
atopy. Aust Vet Practit 27:138, 1997.
439. O'Dair H, et aI: An open prospective investigation
into aetiology in a group of cats with suspected allergic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 7:193, 1996.
440. Prelaud P: In vitro allergy testing to Dermatophagoides farinae and flea in 99 cases of feline eosinophilic
granuloma complex. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 14:170,1997.
441. Prelaud P, et al: Le chat allergique. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 34:437, 1999.
442. Prost C: Les dermatoses allergiques du chat. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 28:151, 1993.
443. Prost C: Hypersensitivity to tobacco in six dogs and
two cats: A social disease. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Eur Soc Vet Dennatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 10:70,
1993.
444. Prost C: Diagnosis of feline allergic diseases: A study

662 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
of 90 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, p. 516.
445. Reedy LM: Results of allergy testing and hyposensitization in selected feline skin diseases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 18:618, 1982.
446. Boosje PJ, et al: Feline atopic dermatitis: A model for
Langerhans' cell participation in disease pathogenesis.
Am J Pathol 151:927, 1997.
447. Roosje PJ, Willemse T: Cytophilic antibodies in cats
with miliary dermatitis and eosinophilic plaques: Passive transfer of immediate-type hypersensitivity. Vet
Q 17:66, 1995.
448. Roosje PJ, et al: A role of Th2 cells in the pathogenesis of allergic dermatitis in cats? Cong Br Netherlands
Soc Immunol 86(1):98, 1995.
449. Roosje PJ, et al: MHC Class II+ and CDIA+ cells
in lesional skin of cats with allergic dermatitis. World
Cong Vet Dermatol 3:59, 1996.
450. Roosje PJ, et al: Immunopathogenesis of feline atopic
dermatitis current concepts. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur CoIl Vet Dennatol 15,
Speaker's Notes, 1998.
451. Roosje PJ, et al: Increased numbers of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells in lesional skin of cats with allergic
dermatitis. Vet Pathol 35:268, 1998.
452. Saint-Andre I, et al: Quantitative assessment of CD18
positive major histocompatibility complex class II positive and CDla positive epidermal dendritic cells in
the cat. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, p. 524.
453. Scott DW, et al: Miliary dennatitis: A feline cutancous reaction pattern. Proc Annu Kal Kan Semin 2:11,
1986.
454. Scott DW, et al: Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis in the
cat: An unusual manifestation of feline allergic skin
disease? Comp Anim Pract 19:6, 1989.
455. Scott DW: Analyse du type de reaction histopathologique dans le diagnostic des dermatoses inflammatoires chez le chat: Etude sur 394 cas. Point Vet 26:57,
1994.
456. Willemse T, et al: Changes in plasma cortisol, corticotropin, and a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone concentrations in cats before and after physical restraint
and intradermal testing. Am J Vet Res 54:69, 1993.

Contact Hypersensitivity
457. Baadsgaard 0, Wang T: Immune regulation in allergic and irritant skin reactions. Int J Dermatol 30:161,
1991.
458. Belisto DV: Allergic contact dermatitis In: Freedberg
1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-HilI, New York, 1999, p. 1447.
459. Bourdeau P, et al: Positive reactions to allergenic
challenge in healthy dogs. Part 2-Pateh test. In:
Kwochka KW, et al, (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 445.
460. Brehler R, et aI: Topically applied pentoxifylliue has
no effect on allergic patch responses. J Am Acad
Dermatol 39:1017, 1998.
461. Calderwood-Mays MB, et aI: Carpet deodorant contact dermatitis in a cat. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:67,
1993.
462. Carlotti DN, et al: Scrotal contact dermatitis in the
dog: A report of 6 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am

Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 15:51,
1999.
463. Clark EG, et al: Cedar wood-induced allergic contact
dermatitis in a dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:68, 1993.
464. Comer KM: Carpet deodorizer as a contact allergen
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1553, 1988.
465. Dunstan RW, et al: Histologic features of allergic
contact dermatitis in four dogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
9:69, 1993.
466. Krawiec DR, Gaafar SM: A comparative study of allergic and primary irritant contact dermatitis with dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB) in dogs. J Invest Dermatol 65:248, 1975.
467. Kunkle GA, Gross TL: Allergic contact dermatitis to
Tradescantia fluminensis (wandering Jew) in a dog.
Comp Cont Educ 5:925, 1983.
468. Kunkle GA: Contact allergic dermatitis. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 18:1061, 1988.
469. Marsella R, et al: Use of pentoxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reactions to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
1997.
470. Merchant SR, et al: Eosinophilic pustules and eosinophilic dermatitis secondary to patch testing a dog with
Asian jasmine. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 9:64, 1993.
471. Michaud AJ: Plastic shopping bag as a possible contact allergen in a cat. Feline Pract 19:6, 1991.
472. Mydlarski PR, et al: Contact dermatitis. In: Middleton E, et aI (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V.
c.v. Mosby, St Louis, 1998, p. 1135.
473. Nobreus N, et al: Induction of dinitrochlorobenzene
contact sensitivity in dogs. Monogr Allergy 8:100,
1974.
474. Olivry T, et al: Allergic contact dermatitis in the dog.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 20:1443, 1990.
475. Olivry T: Allergic contact dermatitis to cement: A
delayed hypersensitivity to dichromates and nickel.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol Am
CoIl Vet Dermatol 9:63, 1993.
476. Prelaud P: Dermatite de contact a la neomycine chez
un chat. Action Vet 21:1169, 1991.
477. Rietschel RL: Irritant contact dermatitis. Mechanisms
in irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 15:557,
1997.
478. Schultz KT, Maguire HC: Chemically-induced delayed hypersensitivity in the cat. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 3:585, 1982.
479. Schultz RD, Adams LS: Immunologic methods for
the detection of humoral and cellular immunity. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Clin 8:721, 1978.
480. Schwartz A, et aI: Pentoxifylline suppresses irritant
and contact hypersensitivity reactions. J Invest Dermatol 101:549, 1993.
481. Thomsen MK, Kristensen F: Contact dermatitis in
the dog: A review and clinical study. Nord Vet Med
38:129, 1986.
482. Thomsen MK, Thomsen HK: Histopathological
changes in canine allergic contact dermatitis patch
test reactions: A study on spontaneously hypersensitive dogs. Acta Vet Scand 30:379, 1989.
483. Walder EJ, Conroy JD: Contact dermatitis in dogs
and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental
induction and case reports. Vet Dennatol 5:149,
1994.
484. Walton GS: Allergic contact dermatitis. In: Kirk RW

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 663
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia, 1977, p. 571.
485. White PD: Contact dermatitis in the dog and cat.
Semin Vet Med Surg 6:303, 1991.
486. Willemse T, Vroom MA: Allergic dermatitis in a
Great Dane due to contact with hippeastrum. Vet
Rec 122:490, 1988.

Conine Food Hypersensitivity
487. Rosser EJ: Protein hydrolysates in canine diets to
diagnose and prevent food allergy. Monograph, Allergy Concepts, Inc., 1999.
488. August JR: Dietary hypersensitivity in dogs: Cutaneous manifestations, diagnosis, and treatment. Comp
Cont Educ 7:469, 1985.
489. Batt R, et al: Food allergy and intolerance-the gut
perspective. Waltham Focus, Focus on Skin and
Coat, April, 1999, p. 31.
490. Brown CM, et al: Nutritional management of food
allergy in dogs and cats. Comp Cont Educ 17:637,
1995.
491. Carlotti DN, et al: Food allergy in dogs and cats: A
review and report of 43 cases. Vet Dermatol 1:55,
1990.
492. Denis S, Paradis M: L'allergie alimentaire chez le
chien et Ie chat. I: Revue de la literature. Med Vet
Quebec 24:11, 1994.
493. Denis S, Paradis M: L'allergie alimentaire chez Ie
chien et Ie chat. II: Etude retrospective. Med Vet
Quebec 24:15, 1994.
494. Elmwood CM, et al: Gastroscopic food sensitivity
testing in 17 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 35:199, 1994.
495. Ermel RW, et al: The atopic dog: A model for food
allergy. Lab Anim Sci 47:40, 1997.
496. Fadok VA: Diagnosing and managing the food-allergic
dog. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 16:1541, 1994.
497. Ferguson E, Scheidt VJ: Hypoallergenic diets and
skin disease. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. 459.
498. Ghernati I, et al: A case of food allergy immunohistopathologically mimicking mycosis fungoides. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 432.
499. Griffin CE: Diagnosis and management of food allergy. Proceedings of the European School of Advanced Veterinary Studies, 1999.
500. Groh M, Moser E: Diagnosis of food allergy in the
nonseasonally symptomatic dog using a novel antigen,
low molecular weight diet: A prospective study of 29
cases. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:5, 1998.
501. Cuaguere E, Prelaud P: Les intolerances alimentaires.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 33(Suppl):389, 1998.
502. Guilford WG, et al: The histamine content of commercial pet foods. N Z Vet J 42:201, 1994.
503. Guilford WB, et al: Development of gastroscopic food
sensitivity testing in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:414,
1994.
504. Halliwell REW: Comparative aspects of food intolerance. Vet Med 87:893, 1992.
505. Halliwell REW: Management of dietary hypersensitivity in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 33:156, 1993.
506. Harvey RG: Food allergy and dietary intolerance in
dogs: A report of 25 cases. J Small Anim Pract 33:22,
1993.
507. Hillier A, Kunkle GA: Inability to demonstrate food
antigen-specific IgE antibodies in the serum of food
allergic dogs using the PK and oral PK tests. Proc

Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 10:28, 1994.
508. Jeffers JG, et al: Diagnostic testing of dogs for
food hypersensitivity. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:24,5,
1991.
509. Jeffers JG, et al: Responses of dogs with food allergies to single-ingredient dietary provocation. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 209:608, 1996.
510. Kaplan AJ: Onion powder in baby food may induce
anemia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1405, 1995.
511. Kunkle G, et al: Validity of skin testing for diagnosis
of food allergy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:677,
1992.
512. MacDonald JM: Food allergy. In: Griffin CE, et al
(eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, p. 121.
513. Merchant SR, Taboada J: Food allergy and immunologic diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. Semin Vet
Med Surg 6:316, 1991.
514. Mueller R, Tsohalis J: Evaluation of serum allergenspecific IgE for the diagnosis of food adverse reactions in the dog. Vet Dermatol 9:167, 1998.
515. Olsen JW: Clinical use of gastroscopic food sensitivity
testing in the dog. Proc Am Acad Vet Allergy, 1991.
516. Paterson S: Food hypersensitivity in 20 dogs with skin
and gastrointestinal signs. J Small Anim Pract 36:529,
1995.
517. Rosser EJ Jr: Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 203:259, 1993.
518. Rosser E: Food allergy in dogs and cats: A review.
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:21, 1998.
519. Rosser EJ Jr: Foreword in Allergy Concepts, Inc.:
Protein hydrolysates in canine diets to diagnose and
prevent food allergy. Monograph, Allergy Concepts,
Inc., 1999.
520. Roudebush P, Schick R: Evaluation of a commercial
canned lamb and rice diet for the management of
adverse reactions to food in dogs. Vet Dermatol 5:63,
1994.
521. Roudebush P, et al: Protein characteristics of commercial canine and feline hypoallergenic diets. Vet
Dermatol 5:69, 1994.
522. Roudebush P, et al: Results of a hypoallergenic diet
survey of veterinarians in North America with a nutritional evaluation of homemade diet prescriptions. Vet
Dennatol 3:23, 1992.
523. Sampson HA: Adverse reactions to foods. In: Middleton E, et al (eds): Allergy Principles and Practice V.
c.v. Mosby, St Louis, 1998, P: 1162.
524. Tapp T, et al: Comparisons of a commercial limited
antigen diet versus a home prepared diet in the diagnosis of canine food hypersensitivity, Vet Allergy Clin
Immunol (accepted 1999).
525. Wagner R, Horvath C: Capelin and tapioca 1 dry
food in dogs and cats with food allergy. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet
Dermatol 15:32, 1999.
526. Walton GS: Skin responses in the dog and cat to
ingested allergens: Observations of 100 confirmed
cases. Vet Rec 81:709, 1967.
527. White SD, Mason IS: Dietary allergy: In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990,
p.404.
528. White SD: Food hypersensitivity in 30 dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 188:695, 1986.
529. White SD: Food allergy in dogs. Comp Cont Educ
Pract Vet 20:261, 1998.

664 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
Feline Food Hypersensitivity
530. Dennis JS, et al: Lymphoeytic/plasmacytic colitis in
cats: 14 cases (1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc
202:313, 1993.
531. Gilbert, S., Halliwell REW: The effects of endoparasitism and of the administration of viral vaccines on
the immune response to orally administered antigen
in cats: Possible implications for the pathogenesis of
food hypersensitivity. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 14:29,
1998.
532. Cuaguere E: Intolerance alimentaire ii manifestations
cutanees: A propos de 17 cas chez Ie chat. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 28:451, 1993.
533. Markwell PJ, et aI: Prevalence of food sensitivity in
cats with chronic pruritus, vomiting or diarrhea. In:
Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 493.
534. Reedy LM: Food hypersensitivity to lamb in a cat. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 204:1039, 1994.
535. Rosser EJ: Food allergy in the cat: A prospective
study of 13 cats. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. 33.
536. Roudebush P, McKeever PJ: Evaluation of a commercial canned lamb and rice diet for the management of cutaneous adverse reactions to foods in cats.
Vet Dermatol 4:1, 1993.
537. Wasmer ML, et al: Food intolerance mimicking alimentary lymphosarcoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
463-466, 1995.
538. White SD: Food hypersensitivity in cats: 14 cases
(1982-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:692, 1989.
539. Willis JM: Diagnosing and managing food sensitivity
in cats. Vet Med 87:884, 1992.

Canine Flea Bite Hypersensitivity
540. Ascher F, et aI: Antifeeding effect of modem insecticides. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Crp, Spring 1998,
p.20.
541. Carlotti D: Diagnostic de la dermatite par allergie aux
piqures de puce (DAPP) chez Ie chien. L'interet des
intradermoreactions. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 20:
41, 1985.
542. Cook CA, et aI: The in vitro diagnosis of flea bite
hypersensitivity: Flea saliva versus whole-flea extracts.
In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 494.
543. Dryden MW: Laboratory evaluations of topical flea
control products. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp,
Spring 1998, p. 14.
544. Dryden MW: Host-association, host longevity, and
egg production of Ctenocephalides felis felis. Vet Parasitol 34:117, 1989.
545. Dryden MW, Broce AB: Development of a flea trap
for collecting newly emerged Ctenocephalides felis
(Siphonaptera.Pulicidae) in homes. J Med Entomol
30:901, 1993.
545a. Dryden MW, et aI: Techniques for estimating onanimal populations of Ctenocephalides felis (Siphonaptera.Puliculae]. J Med Entomol 31:631, 1994.
546. Dryden M: Investigations of alternative flea control
methodologies, Proc Annu Conf Vet Kansas State
Univ 61:37, 1999.
547. Frank GR, et aI: Salivary allergens of Ctenocephalides
felis: Collection, purification, and evaluation by intradermal skin testing in dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 19(5uppl):20, 1997.

548. Frank GR, et al: Salivary allergens of Ctenocephalides
felis: Collection, purification, and evaluation by intradermal skin testing in dogs. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, P: 201.
549. Greene WK, et aI: Characterization of allergens of
the cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis: Detection and frequency of IgE antibodies in canine sera. Parasite Immunol 15:69, 1993.
550. Greene WK, et al: Isolation and in vitro translation of
messenger RNA encoding allergens of the cat flea,
Ctenocephalides felis. Vet Imrnunol Immunopathol
37:15, 1993.
551. Gross TL, Halliwell REW: Lesions of experimental
flea bite hypersensitivity in the dog. Vet Pathol 22:78,
1985.
552. Cuaguere E, et al: Efficacite de l'imidaclopride dans
Ie traitement de la dermatite par allergie aux piqures
de puces chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
34:231, 1999.
553. Carlotti DN, et al: Interet d'une formulation de permethrine en spot-on dans Ie traitement de la dermatite par allergie aux piqflres de puce chez Ie chien:
Une etude prospective de 24 cas. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 32:83, 1997.
554. Halliwell REW: Hyposensitization in the treatment of
flea bite hypersensitivity: Results of a double-blinded
study. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:249, 1981.
555. Halliwell REW, Longino SJ: IgE and IgG antibodies
to flea antigen in differing dog populations. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 8:215, 1985.
556. Halliwell REW, Schemmer KR: The role of basophils
in the immunopathogenesis of hypersensitivity to fleas
(Ctenocephalides felis) in dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 15:203, 1987.
557. Halliwell REW: Clinical and immunological response
to alum-precipitated flea antigen in immunotherapy of
flea-allergy dogs. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. 41.
558. Hickey GJ, et al: Effects of prednisone on dermal
responses in flea-allergen hypersensitized dogs. Vet
Dermatol 4:71, 1993.
559. Hnilica KA, et al: Induced leukotriene C4 synthesis in
dogs with naturally occurring flea allergy. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 13:24, 1997.
560. Hinkle N: Biological functions and larval management
strategies affecting cat flea (Ctenocephalides felis
Buche) population. PhD Thesis, University of Florida,
Gainesville, 1992.
561. Hopkins T: Imidacloprid and resolution of signs of
flea allergy dermatitis in dogs. Canine Pract 23:18,
1998.
562. Kwochka KW, et al: Flea salivary antigen rush immunotherapy for flea allergy dermatitis in dogs: A double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical study. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
Vet Dermatol 14:107, 1998.
563. Lee SE, et al: Salivary antigens of the cat flea,
Ctenocephalides felis felis. Parasite Immunol 19:13,
1997.
564. Lee SE, et al: Putative salivary allergens of the cat
flea, Ctenocephalides felis felis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:229, 1999.
565. MacDonald JM: Flea allergy dermatitis and flea control. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
p.57.

Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases • 665
566. McCall CA, et aI: FCE Ria-based measurement of
anti-flea saliva IgE in dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract
Vet 19(5uppl):24, 1997.
567. McCall C, et aI: Cloning, expression, and characterization of a major allergen associated with flea bite
hypersensitivity in the dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet Dermatol 15:
156, 1998.
568. McKeon SE, Opdebeeck JP: IgG and IgE antibodies
against antigens of the cat flea, Ctenocephalides felis
felis, in sera of allergic and nonallergic dogs. Int J
Parasitol 24:259, 1994.
569. Payne P: Resistant flea strains: Fact or fiction. Proc
Annu Conf Vet Kansas State Univ 61:125, 1999.
570. Penaliggon J, et al: Winter prevalence of flea infestation and flea allergy dermatitis in cats and dogs in
Great Britain and Ireland. Proc Annu Memb Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet DermatoI14:167, 1997.
571. Prelaud P, Cuaguere E: Diagnostic de la dermatite
par allergie aux piqures de puces. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 33(Suppl):373, 1998.
572. Schemmer KR, Halliwell REW: Efficacy of alumprecipitated flea antigen for hyposensitization of f1eaallergic dogs. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:195, 1987.
573. Stolper R, Opdebeeck JP: Flea allergy dermatitis in
dogs diagnosed by intradermal skin tests. Res Vet Sci
57:21, 1994.
574. Willemse T: The diagnostic value of a whole-flea extract in dogs with clinical flea bite hypersensitivity. In:
Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p. 491.

Feline Flea Bite Hypersensitivity
575. Harvey RG, et al: Prospective study comparing fipronil with dichlorvos/fenitrothion and methoprene/
pyrethrins in control of flea bite hypersensitivity in
cats. Vet Rec 141:628, 1997.
576. Kunkle GA, Milcarsky J: Double-blind flea hyposensitization in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:677, 1985.
576a. Kunkle GA, et aI: Immediate intradermal flea antigen reactivity in clinically normal dogs from south
Florida, USA. Vet Dermatol 11:9, 2000.
577. Lewis DT, et aI: Clinical and histological evaluation
of immediate and delayed flea antigen intradermal
skin test and flea sites in normal and flea-allergic cats.
Vet Dermatol 10:29, 1999.
578. McCall CA, et aI: Correlation of feline IgE, determined by FCE Ria-based ELISA technology, and
lOST to Ctenocephalides felis salivary antigens in a
feline model of flea bite allergic dermatitis. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19(5uppl):29, 1997.
579. McDonald BJ, et aI: An investigation on the influence
of feline flea allergy on the fecundity of the cat flea.
Vet Dermatol 9:75, 1998.
580. Moriello KA, McMurdy MA: The prevalence of positive intradermal skin test reactions to flea extract in
clinically normal cats. Comp Anim Pract 19:28, 1989.
581. Plant JD: Recognizing the manifestations of flea allergy in cats. Vet Med 86:482, 1991.

Feline Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
582. Johnstone AC, et aI: A seasonal eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. N Z Vet J 40:168, 1992.
583. Mason KY, Evans AG: Mosquito bite caused eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:
2086, 1991.
584. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Conference in dermatology-No.

2. Mosquito bite hypersensitivity in a cat. Vet Dermatol 5:33, 1994.
585. Nagata M, Ishida T: Cutaneous reactivity to mosquito
bites and its antigen in cats. Vet Dermatol 8:19-26,
1997.
586. Wilkinson GT, Bates MJ: A possible further clinical
manifestation of the eosinophilic granuloma complex.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:325, 1982.

Insect, Arachnid, and Helminth Hypersensitivity
587. Baldo BA, Panzani RC: Detection of IgE antibodies
to a wide range of insect species in subjects with
suspected inhalant allergies to insects. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol 85:278, 1988.
588. Boord MJ: Personal communication, 1995.
589. Bomstein S, Zakrisoon G: Serodiagnosis of sarcoptic
mange in dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Eur Soc Vet
Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 7:160, 1990.
590. Buerger RG: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity disorders of dogs and cats. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995, p. 631.
591. Chii-Huei W, et aI: Isolation and preliminary characterization of cDNA encoding American cockroach allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 96:3, 1995.
592. Friberg CA, Lewis DT: Insect hypersensitivity in
small animals. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:1121,
1998.
593. Griffin CE, et al: Detection of insect/arachnid specific
IgE in dogs: Comparison of two techniques utilizing
Western blots as the standard. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, P: 263.
594. Griffin CE: Insect and arachnid hypersensitivity. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p. 133.
595. Griffin CE: Scabies. In: Griffin CE, et aI (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St.
Louis, 1993, p. 85
596. Hargis AM, et aI: Dermatitis associated with mlcrofilariae (Filarioidea) in 10 dogs. Vet Dermatol 10:95,
1999.
597. Lierl MB, et aI: Concentrations of airborne insectderived particles in outdoor air [Abstract 412]. J Allergy Clin Immunol 85:246, 1990.
598. Moriello KA: Parasitic hypersensitivity. Semin Vet
Med Surg 6:286, 1991.
599. Mozos E, et aI: Cutaneous lesions associated with
canine heartworm infection. Vet Dermatol 3:191,
1992.
600. Powell MA, et aI: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodectes cynotis infestation of cats and mode of mite feeding. Am J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
601. Pucheu-Haston CM, et aI: Allergenic cross reactivities
in flea-reactive canine serum samples. Am J Vet Res
57:1000, 1996.
602. Rothstein E, et aI: Investigation of insect hypersensitivity and response to immunotherapy in allergic dogs.
Submitted (1999).
603. Thoday KL: Serum immunoglobulin concentrations in
canine scabies. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p. 211.
604. Wagner R: Beitrag zur Pravalenz, K1inik und Diagnostik der Kaninen Atopic. Thesis Veterinarmedizinischen Universitat Wien, 1995, p. 99.

Canine Eosinophilic Furunculosis of the Face
605. Curtis CF, et aI: Canine eosinophilic folliculitis and

666 • Skin Immune System and Allergic Skin Diseases
furunculosis in three cases. J Small Anim Pract 36:
119, 1995.
606. Fondati A, Mechelli L: Cutaneous arthropod reactions in the dog: 6 cases. In: Kwochka KW, et aI
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 576.
607. Gross TL: Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the
face. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993,
p.239.
608. Cuaguere E, et aI: Furonculose eosinophilique chez
Ie chien: Etude retrospective de 12 cas. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 31:413, 1996.
609. Hotz CS: Eosinophilic dermatitis in a Siberian husky.
Calif Vet 44:11, 1990.

Hormonal Hypersensitivity
610. Chamberlain KW: Hormonal hypersensitivity in canines. Canine Pract 1:18, 1974.
611. Coustou 0, et al: Dermatitis caused by estrogens.
Ann Dermatol Venerol 125:505, 1998.
612. Lee CW, et al: Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis.
J Dermatol 19:629, 1992.
613. Miura MT, et al: Two cases of autoimmune progesterone dermatitis: Immunohistochemical and serological studies. Acta Dermatol Venerol 69:308, 1989.
614. Moghadam BK, et al: Autoimmune progesterone dermatitis and stomatitis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
PatholOral Radiol Endocrinol 85:537, 1998.
615. Prost C, et al: Hypersensibilite hormonale et allergie
alimentaire chez une chienne Labrador. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 30:411, 1995.

616. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Probable hormonal hypersensitivity in two male dogs. Canine Pract 17:14,
1992.

Baaerial Hypersensitivity
617. Burkett G, Frank LA: Comparison for production of
Staphylococcus intermedius exotoxin among clinically
normal dogs, atopic dogs with recurrent pyoderma,
and dogs with a single episode of pyoderma. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 213:232, 1998.
617a. DeBoer OJ, et al: Immunomodulatory effects of
staphylococcal antigens and antigen-antibody complexes on canine mononuclear and polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Am J Vet Res 55:1690, 1994.
61Th. Halliwell REW: Levels of IgE and IgG antibodies to
staphylococcal antigens in normal dogs and dogs with
recurrent pyoderma. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet DermatoI3:5, 1987.
618. Miller WH Jr: Antibiotic-responsive generalized nonlesional pruritus in a dog. Cornell Vet 81:389, 1991.
618a. Morales CA, et al: Antistaphylococcal antibodies in
dogs with recurrent staphylococcal pyoderma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 41:137, 1994.
619. Pukay BP: Treatment of bacterial hypersensitivity by
hyposensitization with Staphylococcus aureus bacterin-toxoid. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:479, 1985.
620. Scott OW, et aI: Staphylococcal hypersensitivity in the
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:666, 1978.
621. Strange P, et aI: Staphylococcal enterotoxin B applied
on intact normal and intact atopic skin induces dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 132:27, 1996.

Clw]Jtcr

9
Immune-Mediated Disorders

I

mmune-mediated dermatoses are well recognized" but uncommon skin diseases in
dogs and cats. These dermatoses have been reported to account for 1.4% and 1.3%,
respectively, of all canine and feline dermatoses examined by the dermatology service at a
university small animal practice.P" They have been subdivided into primary or autoimmune, and secondary or immune-mediated, the latter believed to be primarily diseases
wherein tissue destruction results from an immunologic event that is not directed against
normal self-antigens. 25 , 65
In autoimmune disease, antibodies or activated lymphocytes develop against normal
body constituents and induce the lesions of the disease by passive transfer. is, 59 This may
result from failure to eliminate high-affinity self-reactive lymphocytes in primary lymphoid
organs or failure to regulate the activity of low-affinity self-reactive lymphocytes." A major
level of control of the autoreactive clones of lymphocytes is suppression by suppressor T
cells that are specific for those clones. 25, 65
The development of autoimmune diseases is a reflection of a lack of control or a
bypass of the normal control mechanisms. Over the years, a variety of possible defects
have been described, but the exact abnormal mechanism and what induces these diseases
still remain unknown. Some of the possibilities include (1) suppressor T cell bypass, (2)
suppressor T cell dysfunction, (3) abnormal major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II
expression or interaction, (4) cytokine and receptor ligand abnormalities, (5) autoantigen
modification, (6) cross-reacting antigens, (7) inappropriate interleukin (IL)-2 production,
(8) idiotype/anti-idiotype imbalance, (9) mutations in receptor affinity, and (10) failure of
clonal deletion of low-affinity autoreactive thymocytes. t In addition, there is sexual dimorphism in the immune response, with female sex hormones tending to accelerate immune
responses and male sex hormones tending to suppress responses."
In secondary immune-mediated diseases, the antigen is foreign to the body. Most
commonly, the inciting antigens are drugs, bacteria, and viruses that stimulate an immunologic reaction that results in host tissue damage," 25, 47, 65 Superantigens are gene products
that are recognized by a large fraction of T cells and have the potential to interfere with
the recognition and elimination of conventional antigens. 28 These gene products may play
a role in the genesis of immune-mediated diseases. So-called "epitope spreading" may also
be important in autoimmune diseases. us In this situation, patients' bodies make antibodies
against one protein early in their disease. Then, as the disease evolves, patients' bodies
make additional antibodies against molecules that are similar in structure or even unlike in
structure but physically closely associated within the tissue .

• DIAGNOSIS OF IMMUNE-MEDIATED SKIN DISEASE
The diagnosis of the these dermatoses requires demonstration of characteristic dermatopathologic changes and, optimally, the autoantibodies, immune complexes, or mediators

'See references 21, 22, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 34, 38, 47, 55-57, 59, 66, 67.
tSee references 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 12, 15, 17, 25, 26, 27, 35, 37, 39, 41-43, 48, 58, 59, 61, 65, 68, 70

667

668 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
(e.g., cytotoxic T cells) of the immunologic injury. Establishing the presence of characteristic dermatopathology requires cutaneous biopsy (see Chap. 2). In general, the following
guidelines should be observed-":

1. Multiple biopsies should always be taken.
2. Samples should be selected from the most representative lesions of the suspected
immune-mediated diseases.
3. Punch biopsy samples should be taken as gently as possible; wedge biopsy by
scalpel excision may be necessary.
4. Whenever possible, biopsy specimens should be taken when the animal is not
under the effects of any glucocorticoid or immunosuppressive therapy.20, 47, 56
5. Dermatopathologic examination should be performed by a veterinary pathologist
who has a special interest in dermatopathology or by a veterinary dermatologist
trained in dermatopathology.
Establishing the mediator of the immunologic damage may require biopsy and/or
analysis of the patient's serum for auto or abnormal antibodies. The biopsies for immunopathologic examination often must be processed in special ways that may require fresh
tissue, frozen tissue, or specially fixed samples, depending on the test to be performed.
The veterinary immunopathology laboratory will be able to tell you what is required. Tests
used to detect the presence of autoantibodies or various immunoreactants (e.g., immunoglobulins, complement components, microbial antigens) in skin lesions include immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical (immunoperoxidase) testing (Fig. 9-1).7, 45, 73 In
general, the following guidelines are used for collecting these biopsy specimens:

1. Biopsy specimens for direct antibody testing should be selected from areas not
secondarily infected and generally representing the earliest lesion typical for that
disease; a possible exception is discoid lupus erythematosus, wherein older lesions
may be preferred, Vasculitis lesions less than 24 hours old are best. For bullous
diseases, the blister itself is not sampled; instead, the adjacent normal skin or
erythematous skin is used.
2. Sites wherein immunoglobulins are often present in normal tissue (e.g., nasal
planum of dogs and cats, footpads of dogs) should not be sampled or should be
interpreted appropriately (see Chap. 1).33,47
3. Samples for direct immunofluorescence testing need to be fixed and mailed in
Michel's fixative. Samples for direct immunoperoxidase testing may be formalinfixed. The results of studies of tissues processed by quick-freezing and of those
kept in Michel's fixative for up to 2 weeks are comparable. 10, 47 Studies in dogs and
cats suggest that specimens may reliably be preserved in Michel's fixative for at
least 7 to 14 days. In some instances, specimens have successfully been preserved
for 4 to 8 years.P- 47 The pH of Michel's fixative must be carefully maintained at
7.0 to 7.2 to ensure accurate results. 55, 56
4. Samples for direct antibody detection should be sent to a veterinary immunopathology laboratory.
Testing for abnormal antibody or immune complex deposition is considered highly
valuable in human medicine for many of the immune-mediated dermatoses. For the
similar canine and feline diseases, however, their value has been considerably less. Reports
from veterinary immunopathology research laboratories show that techniques and results
appear to be improving. 51,59, 140 However, these tests are fraught with numerous procedural and interpretational pitfalls, including method of specimen handling, choice of
substrates used, method of substrate handling, specificity of conjugates, fluorescein-protein-antibody concentrations, and unitage of conjugates. An in-depth discussion of these
factors is beyond the scope of this chapter; the reader is referred to Beutner and
colleagues for details."
The incidence of positive results in the canine disorders typically varies from about
25% to 90% for direct immunofluorescence testing,l9, 47, 55, 56 Positive results are

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 669

FIGURE 9-1. A, Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Direct
immunofluorescence testing reveals host IgG within the
intercellular spaces of epidermis. B, Canine pemphigus
erythematosus. Direct immunofluorescence testing reveals host IgG within the intercellular spaces of epidermis and along the basement membrane zone. (A and B,
from Scott DW, Lewis RM: Phemphigus and pemphigoid in a dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad
Dermatol 5:148, 1981.) Figure continueson following page

670 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-1. Continued. C, Canine bullous pemphigoid. Direct immunofluorescence testing reveals host IgG deposited at the basement membrane zone. (From Scott DW, et al: Observations on the end therapy of canine pemphigus and
pemphigoid. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:48, 1982.) D, Canine cutaneous vasculitis. Direct immunofluorescence testing
reveals host IgG within blood vessel walls.

much more commonly achieved with the immunoperoxidase technique. With this
technique, however, the incidence of false-positive results is also much higher. 23 . 44 In fact,
the intercellular and basement membrane zone deposition of immunoglobulins or complement can be detected from time to time in a wide variety of inflammatory dermatoses.44, 47, 55, 56, 73
In order to appropriately interpret these tests, one needs a good biopsy specimen for
histopathologic examination, However, if one has an appropriate specimen for histopathologic examination, further testing and expense is usually not necessary, Thus, we, as well
as others.t" do not think that these tests need to be routinely done in the work-up of a
suspected case of immune-mediated skin disease in a dog or cat.
Autoimmune dermatoses are classified on the basis of the specific autoallergens being
targeted,59, 117, 155. 191 This cannot be determined on the basis of routine immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing, Specific identification requires techniques such as
immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting. This is rarely done in routine veterinary diagnostic laboratories and is limited to certain veterinary immunologic research laboratories.
As a result, we may still be lumping together different diseases or variants that share
clinical, histopathologic, and routine immunopathologic features.
Indirect immunofluorescence testing (testing serum for the presence of circulating
autoantibody) in the past rarely yielded positive results in dogs and cats, and results were
conflicting. Therefore, it was not recommended as a cost-effective test. 19, 47, 55, 56 More

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 671

recently, results have been positive in a variety of diseases, including pemphigus foliaceus.P" 139 pemphigus vulgaris, 59, 167, 168 paraneoplastic pemphigus.l'" bullous pemphigoid,180, 185 epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.l'" and alopecia areata. 380, 382 The only disease in
which more than a few cases have been studied is canine pemphigus foliaceus, wherein
the most recent study reported 63% of the cases to yield positive results.P" 140
Now that the technology is available, we should consider obtaining tissue and serum
samples for researchers who are performing these tests correctly and frequently. Only
then will we be able to determine whether the variants described in humans also exist in
dogs and cats and whether their differentiation leads to prognostic or therapeutic value.
Results of immunopathologic testing can never be appropriately interpreted in the absence of histopathologic findings. 46, 47 On the other hand, histopathologic findings are
sufficiently characteristic to be diagnostic in the majority of cases. 22, 47,71
The clinician's time and the owner's money are better spent in the careful selection
and procuring of representative skin specimens and their forwarding to a knowledgeable
dermatopathologist. As techniques that are more sensitive become readily available, this
type of testing will undoubtedly become more common. For now, we recommend collecting serum from dogs and cats with active suspected autoimmune disease and saving it in
the freezer. After other test results are reviewed, and with the recommendation of the
pathologist, the indirect immunofluorescence test may still be performed by an appropriate laboratory or the serum may be submitted to appropriate research centers to support
future progress. This sample may also be used at a later date as a pretreatment sample for
some serum biochemical parameters.

• THERAPY OF IMMUNE-MEDIATED SKIN DISEASES
As a group, all of these immune-mediated dermatoses are characterized by an inappropriate immune response that, to be adequately controlled, may require the use of potent
immunosuppressive and immunomodulating drugs. 16, 76 In the past, this primarily meant
high levels of glucocorticoids and, occasionally, cyclophosphamide or azathioprine. These
initial attempts at treatment, although often successful, led to many side effects (see
Chap. 3). In recent years, however, a variety of different treatment approaches have been
evaluated, and now more therapeutic options are available to the clinician for the management of some of these diseases. The diseases are not all optimally treated in the same
way, however, nor do they carry the same prognosis. Therefore, it is important that the
clinician make as specific a diagnosis as possible, Although much work on new approaches
to the management of these diseases is underway in human medicine, very little of this
information is being applied in veterinary medicine,
The drugs used to treat immune-mediated skin diseases are generally called immunosuppressive agents. However, the exact mechanism of some of these drugs is unknown.
They may act in methods different from those of the more classic immunosuppressive
agents. They are considered together because, whatever their mechanism of action, they
share the feature of being beneficial in managing the immune-mediated skin diseases.
Glucocorticoids are the most common class of drugs used as immunosuppressive
agents. They are discussed in Chapter 3. However, many other drugs are used in practice,
and some are effective only in specific diseases (Table 9-1). A special use of glucocorticoids for the initial treatment of some severe immune-mediated dermatoses is pulse
therapy. Glucocorticoid pulse therapy (11 mglkg methylprednisolone sodium succinate
given intravenously over 1 hour for 3 consecutive days) was used to induce remissions in
cases of canine pemphigus that had not responded to oral glucocorticoids. 79 This therapy
is expensive and not without complications (see Chap. 3).

Cyclophosphamide
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan, Bristol-Meyers Squibb) is metabolized to alkylating agents
that inhibit mitosis by interfering with DNA replication and ribonucleic acid (RNA)

672 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
• Table 9-1

IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE DRUGS AND
INDICATIONS

DRUG

INDUCTION DOSE

Glucocorticoids

Short-term use in severe cases of autoimmune disease

Prednisone
Prednisolone
Triamcinolone
Dexamethasone
Cyclophosphamide

2.2-6.6 mglkg q24h
2.2-6.6 mglkg q24h
0.2-0.6 mglkg q24h
0.2-0.6 mglkg q24h
1.5-2.5 mglkg q48h

Azathioprine

1.5-2.5 mglkg q24h (low dose in
dogs > 30 kg; high dose in dogs
<15 kg)
0.1-0.2 mglkg q24-48h (in cats
usually 0.2 mglkg q48h)
5-10 mglkg q24h

Chlorambucil
Cyclosporine
Chrysotherapy
Aurothioglucose

INDICATIONS

1 mglkg 1M

Auranofin
Dapsone

3-6 mg q24h
1 mglkg q8h (in dogs); 1 mglkg
q24h (with caution, in cats)

Sulfasalazine

22-44 mglkg q8h (in dogs)

Vitamin E

100-400 mg q12h

Tetracycline and niacinamide

In dogs > 10 kg: 500 mg q8h each
In dogs < 10 kg; 250 mg q8h each

Undesirable for long-term use, shortterm use only in severe cases
All immune-mediated disorders; not for
use in cats
All, but especially feline diseases
All
Feline pemphigus foliaceus and erythematosus; plasma cell stomatitis;
plasma cell pododermatitis; canine
pemphigus complex (second choice)
Subcomeal pustular dermatosis; leukocytoclastic vasculitis; pemphigus
complex
Subcomeal pustular dermatosis; vasculitis
Discoid lupus erythematosus; pemphigus erythematosus; epidermolysis

bullosa

Sun avoidance

Discoid lupus erythematosus; pemphigus erythematosus; sterile pyogranulorna syndrome; sterile panniculitis;
uveodermatologic syndrome; lupoid
onychodystrophy; German shepherd
metatarsal fistulae; vasculitis
Discoid lupus erythematosus; pemphigus erythematosus; systemic lupus
erythematosus

transcription and replication. 74 - 76 It is used alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of various neoplasms, as well as for its immunosuppressive activity in nonmalignant diseases and organ transplantation.t"- 82 Able to kill cells
in all phases of the cell cycle, this type of cytotoxic drug is more effective in slow-growing
tumors than phase-specific drugs that act during only a specific time of the cell cycle. It is
most effective against rapidly dividing cells. Lymphocytes are especially sensitive to cyclophosphamide. The drug is immunosuppressive to both the humoral and cell-mediated
immune systems, but it is more effective against B cells than against T cells. Cyclophosphamide suppresses antibody production. Maximal effect occurs if the drug is given
shortly after the antigenic stimulus, when it suppresses primary and secondary humoral
responses.
Major toxic sequelae include sterile hemorrhagic cystitis, bladder fibrosis, teratogenesis, infertility, alopecia and poor hair growth, nausea, inflammation of the gastrointestinal
tract, increased susceptibility to infections, and depression of the bone marrow and
hematopoietic systems. Cats may lose their whiskers. Hemorrhagic cystitis occurs in up to
30% of dogs on chronic therapy of more than 2 months' duratiori." Its effects should be
monitored with periodic hemograms and urinalyses.
Clinical indications include lymphoreticular neoplasms, for which the drug is best
combined with glucocorticoids or vincristine. It can be given with high doses of glucocor-

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 673

ticoids to achieve remission of severe cases of immune-mediated diseases such as systemic
lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, pemphigus complex, bullous pemphigoid, idiopathic
thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, gammopathies, and rheumatoid arthritis.F: 82 The
potential for hemorrhagic cystitis and bladder fibrosis makes this drug less desirable for
long-term (>3 to 4 months) use than azathioprine or chlorambucil.?" Because dogs with
immune-mediated skin disease will be on lifelong or months of therapy, we rarely use this
drug. The protocol for neoplasms is 50 mg/m 2 of body surface area given orally q24h for 4
days, then no treatment for 3 days; this sequence is repeated weekly. For immunosuppression, the oral dosage is 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg. Dosage frequency varies from every other
day to 4 days on and 3 days off. 47. 75, 76

Chlorambucil
Chlorambucil (Leukeran, Glaxo Wellcome) is an orally administered alkylating agent." Its
cytotoxic effect is due to cross-linking of DNA.74-76 Compared with other alkylating
agents, it is slow acting and less toxic. Although serious toxicity is rare at usual doses,
myelosuppression is possible. Consequently, patients should initially be monitored with
hemograms every 2 to 4 weeks. Anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea have been reported at
daily dosing but often resolve with alternate-day dosing. 8o Alopecia and delayed hair
growth after clipping have been reported, and Poodles and Kerry blue terriers are reported to be at greater risk." Chlorambucil is available only in a 2-mg tablet, making it
most useful in small dogs and cats.
Chlorambucil may be useful in the pemphigus complex, bullous pemphigoid, discoid
and systemic lupus erythematosus, immune-mediated vasculitis, and cold agglutinin disease, as well as in lymphocyte and plasma cell malignancies." It is especially helpful in
cats because they do not tolerate azathioprine as well as dogs. The size of the tablet is
very good for use in most cats. It is most commonly combined with a glucocorticoid and,
occasionally, with azathioprine (dogs only!). Chlorambucil may be used to replace cyclophosphamide if hemorrhagic cystitis develops during the use of that drug. The oral dosage
in dogs and cats is 0.1 to 0.2 mgikg q24h to q48h. 76-78,81

Azathioprine
Azathioprine (Imuran, Glaxo Wellcome) is a synthetic modification of 6-mercaptopurine
that can be given orally or by injection.I" 77, 84 However, for skin diseases, the oral route is
usually used. It is metabolized in the liver to 6-mercaptopurine and other active metabolites. 6-Mercaptopurine is then metabolized by three enzyme systems. Xanthine oxidase
and thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) produce inactive metabolites. Humans and possibly dogs that have absent (homozygous) or low (heterozygous) TPMT activity are more
likely to experience myelosuppression." Ten percent of the normal dogs sampled in one
study had low (heterozygous) TPMT activity (9 to 1.3 Vlml RBC; normal, 15.1 to 26.6).87
The drug antagonizes purine metabolism, thereby interfering with DNA and RNA synthesis."
Azathioprine primarily affects rapidly proliferating cells, with its greatest effects on
cell-mediated immunity and T lymphocyte-dependent antibody synthesis. Primary antibody synthesis is affected more than secondary antibody synthesis, Azathioprine is preferred over 6-mercaptopurine because it has a more favorable therapeutic index, and 6mercaptopurine is less effective when given orally in humans.
Even so, azathioprine is a potent drug with potential toxicities, which include anemia,
leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, vomiting, hypersensitivity reactions (especially of the liver),
pancreatitis, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentrations, skin rashes, and alopecia.
The most common significant side effect is diarrhea, which may be hemorrhagic. This
often responds to dose reductions or temporary discontinuation of the drug. 85 More than
90% of patients experience anemia and lymphopenia, but usually not to the degree that
treatment needs to be discontinued. It has also been suggested that patients that are not
responding to therapy, that are not lymphopenic, and that are otherwise tolerating the

674 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
drug very well should have their dose of azathioprine increased." Long-term therapy is
associated with the development of demodicosis, recurrent bacterial pyoderma, or dermatophytosis in at least 10% of cases." Pancreatitis may occur, though this has been
reported in dogs that were also receiving glucocorticoids. 86 We have also noted pancreatitis in a few dogs and, in some cases, azathioprine could be continued when the glucocorticoid was discontinued without further episodes of pancreatitis.
Patients should be monitored initially every 2 weeks with complete blood counts and
platelet counts.F: 85 After the patient's condition is stable, monitoring can be tapered to
once every 4 months. If other symptoms occur, or at least yearly, a chemistry panel
should also be run. Hepatitis and pancreatitis are the major conditions to monitor with
chemistry panels.
In small animals, azathioprine may be beneficial for pemphigus complex, bullous
pemphigoid, and both types of lupus erythematosus, as well as other autoimmune and
immune-mediated disorders." It is most commonly used in cases of canine pemphigus
foliaceus that do not respond to glucocorticoids. Azathioprine is usually not used alone but
is combined with systemic glucocorticoids. There is often a lag phase, with clinical improvement occurring in 3 to 6 weeks.
After remission is achieved, the dosages of both drugs are tapered, but initially, unless
side effects are a problem, the glucocorticoid dosage is tapered to levels approaching 1
mglkg q48h. The oral dosage of azathioprine for dogs is 2.5 mglkg q24h until clinical
response is achieved, and then it is continued every other day for a month or longer. Slow
tapering down to as little as 1 mglkg q72h may be achieved. Slow tapering to the lowest
dose possible decreases side effects and the expense of therapy. Glucocorticoids can be
given on the alternate days when azathioprine is not given. A switch to chrysotherapy has
been recommended if high-dose prednisone in combination with azathioprine at 1 mglkg
q24h for 3 months, then at 2 mglkg q24h for 3 months, is ineffective." Another option is
to continue to increase the azathioprine dose if the complete blood counts are relatively
normal, especially if the patient is not lymphopenic."
Cats are susceptible to azathioprine toxicity (including fatal leukopenia and thrombocytopenia), and this drug should be used very cautiously, if at all, in this species. 83, 84

Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Novartis) is effective in preventing human organ transplantation rejection (see Chap. 3).76, 88, 91 In animal models, it has been used with similar
excellent results.P" It has also been evaluated for the treatment of immune-mediated skin
diseases, and its systemic use is discussed in Chapter 3. Initial studies in dogs and cats
with immunologic dermatoses such as pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and
discoid lupus erythematosus have shown cyclosporine by itself to be rarely effective."? 90 It
is usually used concurrently with glucocorticoids.
Topical cyclosporine, available as a veterinary product in a 0.2% ointment (Optimmune, Schering-Plough), has been used to treat keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Some of the
benefit may reflect the vehicle used. 92 A study treating canine nictitans plasmacytic conjunctivitis showed a Significant response in clinical symptoms as well as a reduction in
post-treatment plasma cell mfiltrates." No controlled studies with topical cyclosporine for
immune-mediated skin diseases have been published. However, we and others have seen
cases of localized disease in lupus erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus that
improved when topical cyclosporine was added to the treatment regimen.

Leflunomide
Leflunomide is active in a wide range of immune disorders in murine and human
models." It has antiprohferative effects on T cell-dependent and T cell-independent
antibody synthesis, inhibits pyrimidine synthesis, and antagonizes the action of IL-3, IL-4,
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a. When used with prednisone and cyclosporine, leflu-

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 675
nomide virtually eliminates allograft rejection responses. One of the metabolites of leflunomide is highly gastroenterotoxic for dogs; thus the dose and dosage regimen must be
closely followed. The dosage for dogs is about 2 to 6 mglkglday orally until a serum
trough level of 30 J,Lglml is achieved.

Chrysotherapy
Chrysotherapy is the use of gold as a therapeutic agent. Gold compounds are capable of
modulating many phases of immune and inflammatory responses, but the exact mechanisms of this effect are unknown.?" 96. 97 Gold is available in two dosage forms, which have
dissimilar pharmacokinetics: The oral compound auranofin (Ridaura, SmithKline Beecham)
contains 29% gold, and the parenteral compound aurothioglucose (Solganal, Schering)
contains 50% gold. Neither form is approved for use in dogs and cats, but their distribution, metabolism, and actions have been established in humans and laboratory animals.
Studies in humans show that the oral forms are 25% absorbed and attain blood levels with
a 21-day half-life, but only small amounts can be detected in tissues and skin.l?" In a few
clinical trials in dogs with immune-mediated dermatoses, the results with oral gold were
equivocal, but no adverse side effects were observed.l'" The parenteral form is 100%
absorbed but has only a 6-day half-life in blood. It is 95% protein-bound and is well
distributed to cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system, liver, spleen, bone marrow,
kidneys, and adrenal glands. Much lower levels are detected in skin.
In humans, gold may act at several levels of the inflammatory and immune response.
Auranofin appears to have an additional immunomodulating action, whereas gold sodium
thiomalate inhibits IL-5-mediated eosinophil survival, but both oral and parenteral golds
inhibit bacteria, the first component of complement, and the epidermal enzymes that may
be responsible for blister formation in pemphigus.96. 99 Gold inhibits phagocytosis by
macrophages." Gold also reduces the release of inflammatory mediators, such as lysosomal enzymes, histamine, and prostaglandin; inactivates complement components; interferes
with immunoglobulin-synthesizing cells; inhibits antigen- and mitogen-induced T-cell proliferation; and suppresses IL-2 and IL-2 receptor synthesis.76.96-98
Toxic effects are worrisome in humans, because 33% of patients have some adverse
reaction, although 80% of these reactions are minor. Most common are skin eruptions,
oral reactions, proteinuria, and bone marrow depression. During the induction phase, a
hemogram and urinalysis should be checked weekly and monthly thereafter.P- 97 In over
100 dogs treated with injectable gold salts, the most common side effect was pain at the
injection site.36 In addition, two dogs experienced reversible thrombocytopenia, and four
dogs experienced fatal toxic epidermal necrolysis when switched immediately from azathioprine to aurothioglucose therapy for pemphigus foliaceus. 36. 94 This may be enhanced
by previous or concurrent administration of azathioprine.77. 96 We have seen aurothioglucose-related erythema multiforme in both dogs and cats and, in one dog and one cat, it
manifested primarily as oral ulceration and erythema,
Parenteral gold (aurothioglucose) has been reported to be effective for the treatment
of cases of canine and feline pemphigus that were unresponsive to glucocorticoids or
azathioprine and prednisone combination therapy.P" 78. 97. 101 It has been useful for the
treatment of canine bullous pemphigoid and feline plasma cell pododermatitis.t" 95. 96
Although most adverse reactions develop late in therapy, it is suggested that a small test
dose of 1 mg be given intramuscularly to patients with less than 10 kg of body weight and
that 5 mg be given to larger patients in the first week. Dosage is increased to 1 mglkg
intramuscularly weekly until remission occurs. If no response occurs after 12 weeks of
therapy, the dosage can be increased to 1.5 to 2 mglkg,77 After remission, one dose is
given every 2 weeks and then once monthly for several months.
It is advisable to halt medication administration eventually for observation because
some patients go into complete remission, whereas other animals can be maintained on a
reduced dosage. Two points of caution: (1) The treatment takes 6 to 12 weeks for full
effect to occur, so that other medication-typically glucocorticoids-should be maintained, if needed, at full dosage until this lag period is passed; and (2) gold compounds

676 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
should not be administered simultaneously with other cytotoxic drugs (such as azathioprine and cyclophosphamide) because toxicity is thereby enhanced.
The oral form of gold (auranofin) has been used in only a few dogs with pemphigus
(at 3 to 6 mglday) with little success. It has been recommended at 0.12 to 0.2 mglkg q12h
but is only available as a nonbreakable 3-mg capsule.'?' In addition, this oral form is
expensive.
Gold is seldom the first-choice drug for pemphigus. Patients are usually started on a
glucocorticoid regimen, with azathioprine added to reduce the steroid dosage. In cases
with excessive side effects, or when azathioprine and prednisone are ineffective, gold is a
logical choice. It may be especially useful in cats. 77• 95 Gold injections should be delayed
for 4 weeks after the discontinuation of azathioprine."

Sulfones and Sulfonamides

DAPSONE
Dapsone (Dapsone tablets, Jacobus) is an anti-inflammatory, antibacterial chemical (4,4'diaminodiphenyl sulfone). It inhibits the action of lysosomal enzymes; neutrophil chemotaxis; degranulation of mast cells; synthesis of IgG, IgA, and prostaglandin; activation of
the alternative complement pathway; and T cell responses.l'" It is an antioxidant scavenger
and also inhibits proteases. It inhibits the incorporation of choline into cell membranes,
resulting in disrupted phospholipid synthesis. 105 It has been suggested that dapsone interferes with myeloperoxidase-halide-mediated toxicity, inhibits neutrophil chemotaxis, inhibits IL- I -stimulated adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells, inhibits adherence of
neutrophils to antibodies deposited in the skin, and inhibits integrin-mediated neutrophil
adherence.F: 107
Dapsone is useful in various diseases characterized by accumulations of neutrophils
and, in some cases, eosinophils.P" 105 In humans, it is most efficacious for dermatitis
herpetiformis and erythema elevatum diutinum. It is erratically effective for a wide variety
of other human skin diseases, including leukocytoclastic vasculitis, bullous lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus erythematosus, sub corneal pustular dermatosis,
linear IgA bullous dermatosis, and relapsing polychondritis.J'" In these cases, the human
dosage regimen starts low and rapidly builds to 150 mglday. This dosage is held until
response occurs and then is gradually decreased and stopped after 4 to 10 months. In
many cases, there is no relapse. Treatment with dapsone is also effective in human leprosy
and some cases of rheumatoid arthritis.
In dogs, dapsone has been used with benefit in cases of subcorneal pustular dermatosis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, linear IgA pustular dermatosis, and pemphigus foliaceus and
erythematosus. 103, 108 Dapsone is most useful in the first two diseases, although not all
cases were controlled. In the last three diseases, only about half the cases showed benefit.
However, in some cases of pemphigus that were successfully treated with immunosuppressive combinations (such as azathioprine with corticosteroids), the addition of dapsone
permitted lowering the dose of the corticosteroid.
Dapsone is not approved for use in dogs and cats in the United States, but reports
suggest a dosage of 1 mglkg q8h (dogs only!) orally for 2 to 4 weeks until lesions clear,
and then a reduction of the frequency of administration to q12h or q24h. Others have
used the drug once daily or every 48 hours in combination with prednisone. The less
frequent administration may be warranted because a study in normal dogs showed a halflife of 13 hours after intravenous administration.P' In one dog given approximately 5 mgl
kg, bioavailability was 99.5% and half-life was 11.5 hours.'!" The maintenance dosage
should be further reduced to q48h, then once or twice weekly, or even stopped, because
toxicity is somewhat dose-related.
Potential toxicity can be serious. During induction, mild anemia, leukopenia, and
moderate elevations of serum alanine aminotransferase levels may be expected, but this
does not necessitate stopping treatment if the animal remains clinically normal. Blood
dyscrasias, thrombocytopenias, skin reactions, and hepatic toxicity can be serious but
appear to be rare. 106, 108 Patients should be monitored every 2 weeks during induction

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 677

therapy with hemograms and platelet counts, blood urea nitrogen determination, urinalysis, and serum alanine aminotransferase determination. Cats are especially susceptible to
dapsone toxicity, with hemolytic anemia and various neurotoxicities reported. A dosage of
1 mglkg q24h orally is recommended.

SULFASALAZINE
Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine, Pharmacia) is converted in the colon to sulfapyridine 5-aminosalicylate, which has anti-inflammatory action. lOB The dosage is 10 to 20 mglkg q8h
orally.f": lOB The dosage may be reduced or even changed to every other day while
maintaining clinical remission. A serious side effect with long-term administration is the
production of keratitis sicca. Thus, tear production should be checked regularly. In one
report, two cases with subcomeal pustular dermatosis were managed satisfactorily with
sulfasalazine after becoming refractory to dapsone.l'" Sulfasalazine has also been used
successfully in the management of neutrophilic vasculitis.P'- 108

TETRACYCLINE AND NIACINAMIDE
The combination of tetracycline and niacinamide has been recommended for the treatment of discoid lupus erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus in dogs. Reported
results are variable, but 25% to 65% of cases have an excellent response. II O- 112 It has also
been effective in some cases of pemphigus foliaceus when added to azathioprine and
prednisone regimens. Some cases of vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (Tdiopathic
ulcerative dermatosis") in collies and Shetland sheepdogs respond well to tetracycline and
niacinamide.
This combination has also been used with success in some dogs with lupoid onychodystrophy, German shepherd dog metatarsal fistulae, sterile panniculitis, sterile granulomatous/pyogranulomatous dermatitis, vasculitis, and cutaneous histiocytosis (see Chap. 3).
The precise mechanism of action is unknown. However, tetracyclines possess various antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory properties, including suppression of in vitro lymphocyte blastogenic transformation and antibody production, suppression of in vivo leukocyte
chemotactic responses, inhibition of the activation of complement component 3, inhibition
of lipases and collagenases, and inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.'!" Niacinamide has
been shown to block antigen-IgE-induced histamine release in vivo and in vitro, prevent
degranulation of mast cells, inhibit phosphodiesterases, and decrease protease releases.U"
The initial dosage for dogs weighing more than 10 kg is 500 mg of tetracycline and
500 mg of niacinamide given q8h. If response is favorable, the dosage may be decreased
to q12h and then to q24h. Although no studies have been reported, one of us (C.E.G.)
noted that this combination may have shown benefit when used concurrently with vitamin
E or glucocorticoids. It was also reported that tetracycline alone may be beneficial in
treating discoid lupus erythematosus.'!' Side effects are uncommon, although vomiting,
anorexia, lethargy, and diarrhea have been reported and are primarily due to the niacinamide.s" lll, 112 One of us (C.E.G.) also saw two cases of anorexia with increased liver
enzyme activity that resolved with discontinuation of therapy. In one case, tetracycline
administration was continued, suggesting that the niacinamide was responsible for the
adverse reactions.

Antimalarials
Several antimalarials have been useful for the treatment of humans with discoid lupus
erythematosus, dermatomyositis, polymorphous light eruption, solar urticaria, and scleroderma.l'" There are also anecdotal reports of response with cutaneous leishmaniasis,
cutaneous cryptococcosis, epidermolysis bullosa, and lymphocytic skin infiltrations.U'' Antimalarials may have future use in problem cases involving animals with such diseases.
Their specific mode of action is unknown, but the drugs stabilize lysosomal membranes and thus are anti-inflammatory. They inhibit protein synthesis, viral replication, and
cell-mediated immunity. They do not affect the development of primary or secondary

678 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
antibody response but do inhibit complement. Consequently, they may inhibit the formation of immune complexes, which explains their effectiveness in systemic lupus erythematosus and related autoimmune disorders. The drugs are seldom used alone for first-line
therapy and, in humans, are usually given with salicylates or small doses of corticosteroids.
Side effects are numerous, the most serious affecting the eyes.
The drugs most commonly used in humans are quinacrine hydrochloride (Atabrine
hydrochloride, Winthrop), chloroquine (Aralen, Winthrop), and hydroxychloroquine sulfate
(Plaquenil sulfate, Winthrop). Their place in veterinary dermatology has yet to be determined, although anecdotal reports suggest that the antimalarials may be beneficial in
canine lupus erythematosus.P' No case reports or studies supporting their efficacy have
been reported.

Colchicine
Colchicine has been useful for the treatment of humans with leukocytoclastic vasculitis,
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, dermatitis herpetiformis,
and relapsing polychondritis.l'" It may have future use in problem cases involving animals
with such diseases.
Colchicine is an alkaloid that suppresses neutrophil chemotactic and phagocytic functions via disruption of microtubule assembly and elongation, increasing cellular cyclic AMP
levels and inhibiting lysosomal degranulation. It also inhibits immunoglobulin secretion,
IL-l production, histamine release, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR expression.
The main side effects are gastrointestinal.
Early clinical reports in dogs involved the use of a colchicine analog in cases of
"eczema.T'" These reports are not interpretable.

• AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
Pemphigus Complex
The pemphigus complex is a group of uncommon autoimmune diseases described in dogs
and cats that is comparable to the human disease. Although there are similarities, many
Significant differences exist. These disorders are vesiculobullous to pustular disorders of
the skin or mucous membranes characterized by acantholysis (loss of cohesion between
keratinocytes). In humans, there are at least eight varieties of pemphigus, whereas dogs
and cats have at least five varieties.P: 155. 169

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In humans, the pemphigus complex is characterized histologically by intraepithelial acantholysis leading to vesicle formation and lmrnunologically by the presence of autoantibodies to components of the keratinocyte desmosome, both bound in the skin and
circulating in the serum.l'" 118. 155 The clinical lesions, both in severity and in body
location, appear to relate to which components of the desmosome the autoantibodies are
targeting. ll7· 146. 155. 165 For instance, humans with mucosal dominant pemphigus vulgaris
have antibodies against desmoglein III, those with pemphigus foliaceus produce antibodies
against desmoglein I, and patients with mucocutaneous pemphigus vulgaris produce
both.'!" Using a neonatal mouse model, the injection of antidesmoglein III IgG alone is
not efficient at inducing gross skin lesions, whereas combining both antidesmoglein III
and antidesmoglein I does produce lesions.P? As pemphigus vulgaris progresses to cutaneous involvement, antidesmoglein I antibodies are produced, possibly because of epitope
spreading.
In dogs and cats, only pemphigus vulgariS causes an intraepidermal vesicle or bulla.
The other forms of pemphigus are typically associated with intraepidermal pustules, a
major distinction between the human and the canine and feline diseases.v- 127, 130 In the

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 679
past, pemphigus antibody was not readily demonstrated in the skin or serum of many dogs
and cats.P" In humans, negative immunologic findings raise serious doubts about the
diagnosis for some variants of pemphigus. However, as the techniques to find serum
autoantibodies improve, the frequency of detection increases. 137. 138, 140 These two differences raise questions about the pathologic similarities and the accuracy of the diagnosis
based on just clinical and histopathologic findings between the human and animal diseases. Part of the discrepancy also relates to sensitivity and technique because we appear
to be finding more cases with detectable serum autoantibodies, and these autoantibodies
do target similar or identical structures as in the human diseases. 59. 125, 138, 167, 168 Further
studies comparing cases with and without appropriate immunologic findings are needed to
determine whether we have multiple similar diseases or the identification primarily relates
to the sensitivity of the techniques being used.
Pemphigus antigens are heterogeneous (85 to 260 kd) and present in all mammalian
and avian skin, and those identified specifically are associated with desmosomal components.P" 125, 126, 155 In humans, regional variation exists in the expression of both pemphigus
foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris antigens, which also differ from each other.P" This
regional difference and the specific profile of the patient's autoantibodies correlate with,
and help to explain, the distribution of lesions in clinical disease. 117, 146 Canine skin has
been shown to have similar antigens.I" 167, 168 The pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus
foliaceus antibodies from human patients reproduce their respective clinical, histopathologic, and immunopathologic syndromes when injected into neonatal mice. Antibodies to
some of these antigens are not associated with pathology, however.
The pathomechanism of blister formation in pemphigus is unknown, though it has
been proposed to be as follows: (1) the binding of pemphigus antibody on the antigen, (2)
internalization of the pemphigus antibody and fusion of the antibody with intracellular
lysosomes, and (3) resultant activation and release of a keratinocyte proteolytic enzyme
(plasminogen activator or another factor), which diffuses into the extracellular space and
converts plasminogen into plasmin, which hydrolyzes the adhesion molecules. 18, 124, 167, 168
The resultant loss of intercellular cohesion leads to acantholysis and blister formation
within the epidermis. The pemphigus antibody-induced acantholysis is not dependent on
complement or inflammatory cells. Experimentally, however, complement potentiates the
acantholysis. Urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptors were shown to have increased expression in the skin lesions of humans with pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus
foliaceus.'?' Other studies have shown that plasminogen activator activity does not correlate with lesion development, and studies conducted in genetically engineered mouse
models also have suggested that direct interference with the antibody targets creates
similar lesions."
In desmoglein IIlnull mice, treatment with human pemphigus vulgaris serum induces
extensive acantholysis and blistering, suggesting that autoantibodies against cell-surface
molecules other than desmoglein I and desmoglein III can induce pemphigus vulgaris.!"
Patients with pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus have IgG antibodies that precipitate cholinergic receptors.v" Because cholinergic receptors control keratinocyte adhesion and motility, their inactivation by autoantibodies may elicit cell signals that cause
desmosomal disassembly. Although keratinocyte desmosomal cadherins (desmoglein I and
III) hold the cells together, desmoglein Illnull mice do not experience spontaneous acantholysis and blisters. In addition, activation of cholinergic receptors can prevent, stop, and
reverse the acantholysis elicited by pemphigus antibodies in vitro. Thus, the acantholysis
in pemphigus may be mediated by at least two complementary pathogenic pathways: (1)
anticholinergic receptor autoantibodies that weaken intercellular adhesion between keratinocytes via inactivation of the cholinergic receptor-mediated physiologic control of cadherin (desmoglein) expression and/or function, which causes dyshesion, cell detachment,
and rounding up (acantholysis), and (2) autoantibodies to other adherence molecules (e.g.,
desmoglein) that prevent the formation of new desmosomes.
Ultraviolet light irradiation exacerbates the acantholysis induced by anti-desmoglein I
and anti-desmoglein III autoantibodies in patients with pemphigus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, and pemphigus vulgaris. 139 , 153.

680 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
What initiates the autoantibody formation is still unknown, though a virus spread by
an insect vector is suspected in an endemic form of pemphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem)
in South America. 18. 145 It has been suggested that the black fly may play the role of
vector. This hypothesis has been supported by an epidemiologic study correlating exposure
to black flies as a risk factor for endemic pemphigus foliaceus.r"
Genetic factors in humans and dogs also appear to be important. In humans, both
pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris have HLA associations, and some populations
may be susceptible to pemphigus vulgaris due to differences in their immune response
genes. 18 Although this has not been demonstrated in dogs, breed predispositions and
familial cases have been shown. 47, 150 Other factors thought to be involved in the (pathogenesis of some cases of pemphigus are drug provocation (especially penicillamine and
phenylbutazone), ultraviolet light, and emotional upset." 18. 47. 139. 157, 163, 164 Drugs and
chronic skin disease both seem to be important in the pathogenesis of some cases of
canine and feline pemphigus. 130, 131 Interestingly, drug-induced disease in humans is less
commonly associated with classic immunopathologic findings. 172 Possibly, the human druginduced form is more similar to animal pemphigus. The most commonly incriminated
drugs are those with highly reactive sulfhydryl moieties (e.g., penicillamine) and those
with an amide component (e.g., captopril, penicillins, cephalosporins).
Diet has been implicated as a cause of pemphigus in humans.P" 170 The molecular
structure of many food ingredients is similar to that of known pemphigus-inducing drugs.
For instance: thiols contained in garlic, onion, leek, and chive; isothiocyanates in mustard,
horseradish, turnip, radish, cabbage, cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts; phenols in mango,
cashews, and many food additives; and tannins in tea, coffee, ginseng, certain berries,
banana, pear, apple, and avocado. Interestingly, most humans with fogo selvagem live
close to rivers, many of which contain high levels of tannins because of decomposing
leaves and other vegetable matter.F" Heat and humidity cause tannin decomposition.
Perhaps consumption of such substances is more important than black flies!
Owing to the thinness, or other characteristics, of canine and feline epidermis, intraepidermal vesicles, bullae, and pustules are fragile and transient. Thus, clinical lesions
usually include erosions and ulcers bordered by epidermal collarettes.

DIAGNOSIS
The pemphigus complex is uncommon in dogs and cats, accounting for about 0.6% to 1%
of all canine and feline skin disorders seen at university small animal clinics. 56, 59 In
general, the various forms of pemphigus have relatively distinct clinical differences. Certain diagnostic features, however, can be applied to the whole group. The most important
diagnostic aspects are the history, physical examination, and histopathologic findings. Detection of pemphigus antibody by direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical
testing may also be helpful but, owing to costs, technical problems, and relatively poor
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity at routine laboratories, these tests are not routinely
recommended. If they are performed, however, all the pemphigus variants should show an
intercellular deposition of IgG or complement components (see Fig. 9-IA).47, 163. 164 In
three of seven dogs with pemphigus foliaceus, the IgG was of the IgG2 or IgG4 subtypes.P
Occasionally, immunoglobulins of other classes are found. Indirect immunofluorescence testing infrequently yields positive results unless a research laboratory is used; even
then, results are still not routinely positive.P' Pemphigus erythematosus may show deposition of immunoreactants along the basement membrane zone in addition to the intercellular findings (see Fig. 9-IB). Microscopic examination of direct smears from intact vesicles
or pustules or from recent erosions often reveals numerous nondegenerate neutrophils,
occasionally numerous eosinophils, and numerous acantholytic keratinocytes. 55 , 164 One or
two acantholytic keratinocytes may be visible in an occasional high-power microscopic field
during microscopic examination in any suppurative condition, but when these cells are
present in clusters or large numbers in several microscopic fields, they are strongly
suggestive of pemphigus.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 681

Skin biopsy may be diagnostic or strongly supportive in pemphigus.22, 47, 55. 164 Intact
vesicles, bullae, or pustules are essential. Because these lesions are so fragile and transient, it may be necessary to hospitalize the animal so that it can be carefully scrutinized
for 2 to 4 hours for the presence of primary lesions. When a bullous lesion is observed,
biopsy must be performed immediately. Multiple biopsies and serial sections greatly
increase the chances of demonstrating diagnostic histologic changes.
Electron-microscopic examination of pemphigus lesions has suggested that dissolution
of the intercellular cement substance is the initial pathologic change, followed by the
retraction of tonofilaments, disappearance of desmosomes, and acantholysis. 163, 164
Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram, serum chemistries, urinalysis,
serum protein electrophoresis) are nondiagnostic, often revealing mild to moderate leukocytosis and neutrophilia, mild nonregenerative anemia, mild hypoalbuminemia, and mild to
moderate elevations of (X2, (3, and 'Y globulins. 163, 164

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF PEMPHIGUS: GENERAL COMMENTS
The prognosis for canine pemphigus appears to vary with the form and severity of the
disease. 55. 16,3. 164 The natural course of untreated cases is unclear. Veterinarians have long
recognized refractory mucocutaneous erosive or ulcerative disorders and severe exfoliative
dermatoses that have resulted in the death or euthanasia of affected dogs and cats.
Retrospectively, many of those dogs and cats may have had pemphigus vulgaris or pemphigus foliaceus. On the basis of the small numbers of cases documented in the veterinary
literature, (1) pemphigus vulgaris appears to be a severe disease that is often fatal and,
even with treatment, many animals fail to respond and are euthanized, (2) pemphigus
foliaceus is less severe but, without therapy, may be fatal, and (3) pemphigus erythematosus and panepidermal pustular or pemphigus vegetans are usually benign disorders that
rarely produce systemic signs and readily respond to treatment.P" 47. 59
Because the prognosis and treatment for the different forms varies, it is important to
make a specific diagnosis. Suspect drug-induced cases of pemphigus may not require
prolonged therapy and seem more likely to allow treatment to be permanently discontinued after remission has been maintained for 6 months. Too few cases of paraneoplastic
pemphigus have been described to allow comment, though this condition carries a very
poor prognosis in humans.
Therapy of canine and feline pemphigus is often difficult, requiring large doses of
systemic glucocorticoids with or without other potent immunomodulating drugs. 47, 55,163,164
Side effects of these drugs are common, varying from mild to severe, and close physical
and hematologic monitoring of the patient is critical. Additionally, therapy must usually be
maintained for prolonged periods, if not for life. Thus, the therapeutic regimen must be
individualized for each patient, and owner education is essential.
Large doses of glucocorticoids (2 to 6 mglkg prednisone orally q24h in dogs; 4 to 8
mglkg prednisone q24h in cats) induce remission in most patients. However, severe
glucocorticoid side effects and the inability to achieve safe alternate-day maintenance
regimens render these drugs unacceptable in at least 50% of cases. In our referral
dermatology practices, only 30% to 40% of cases are adequately controlled with glucocorticoids alone.
When glucocorticoids are ineffective or undesirable, other immunomodulating drugs
can be used in an attempt to reduce the dosage or eliminate the need for glucocorticoids.
Azathioprine is often the drug of choice in this situation in dogs. Azathioprine should be
used either not at all or very cautiously in cats, because even small doses (1 mglkg orally
q48h) may produce fatal leukopenia or thrombocytopenta.P' Chlorambucil is effective in
dogs and cats and is the preferred treatment in the cat. 154 Chrysotherapy (use of gold
salts) is also useful, especially in cats and cases that cannot be controlled with azathioprine
and prednisone.Pv 36. 47.132,156
In animals in which significant nasal depigmentation has occurred and photodermatitis has become an aggravating factor, photoprotection is an important therapeutic adjunct,55, 153a, 163, 164 Avoidance of sunlight between 8 AM and 5 PM is helpful. The use

682 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
of sunscreens containing para-aminobenzoic acid with high sun-protective factor values
(SPF 15 or greater) is mandatory. Sunscreens should be applied 1 to 2 hours before sun
exposure is anticipated and reapplied every 3 to 4 hours.
Other drugs that may be useful in individual cases include dapsone (with great
caution in cats at 1 mglkg q24h), vitamin E, tetracycline/niacinamide, and products containing omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids (see Chap. 3). The use of pentoxifylline for inhibiting
autoimmune diabetes mellitus in mice suggests its concurrent use may be warranted in
unresponsive cases of pemphlgus.v"
Given the recent interest in diet-induced pemphigus in humans."? perhaps veterinarians should consider a restricted diet trial (paying particular attention to thiols, isothiocyanates, phenols, and tannins) in dogs and cats with refractory cases of pemphigus. One of
us (D.W.S.) has received anecdotal reports of success with diet modification in dogs.

PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
Pemphigus vulgariS has been reported in dogs and cats and appears to be the second
rarest form of pemphigus.P: 147. 164. 166 In a general and specialty dermatology practice, it
accounted for less than 0.1% of cases. 122 In humans and dogs, the major pemphigus
vulgaris antigen is desmoglein III, a 130-kd glycoprotein from the cadherin group of
adhesion molecules.l" 11B, 126, 141, 142, 16B In more severe cases that also have cutaneous
involvement, antibodies to desmoglein I are also present in humans and are pathogenic.I'" 125.
The exact antigen in the feline has not been specifically identtfled.P No age, breed, or
sex predilections have been reported. Pemphigus vulgaris is a vesiculobullous, erosive to
ulcerative disorder that may affect the oral cavity, mucocutaneous junctions (lips, nostrils,
eyelids, prepuce, vulva, anus), skin, or any combination thereof (Fig. 9-2A to D). About
75% to 90% of affected animals have oral cavity lesions at the time of diagnosis, and oral
cavity involvement is the initial sign in about 50%.47, 122 Such animals often present for
halitosis or excessive salivation. Cutaneous lesions occur most commonly in the axillae and
groin. The Nikolsky sign may be present. The clawbed may be involved, resulting in
ulcerative paronychia and onychomadesis. This may be the only presenting sign.122, 162
Pemphigus vulgaris limited to the skin is rare. 151, 162 Pruritus and pain are variable, and
secondary bacterial pyoderma and lymphadenopathy may be present. Severely affected
animals may be anorectic, depressed, or febrile.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris includes bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, drug reaction, candidiasis, idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus) of collies and Shetland
sheepdogs, epitheliotropic lymphoma, and the numerous causes of canine and feline
ulcerative stomatitis.
The definitive diagnOSiS of pemphigus vulgaris is based on history, physical examination, direct smears, biopsy, immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing, and
demonstration of the antigen being targeted (desmoglein III). Pemphigus vulgaris is
characterized histologically by suprabasilar acantholysis with resultant cleft and vesicle
formation (Fig. 9_3).22, 71, 163 Basal epidermal cells remain attached to the basement
membrane zone like a row of tombstones (Fig. 9-4). The dermal inflammatory reaction
may be scant and perivascular (cell-poor) or prominent and interstitial to lichenoid (cellrich).
Management

Pemphigus vulgaris appears to carry the poorest prognosis of this group. In a report of
eight canine cases, only two patients were kept in remission over 1.5 years; three died or
were euthanized, and three were lost to follow-up.P' It has been suggested, and we agree,
that these cases should initially be treated aggressively with high-dose prednisone and
azathioprine." Without treatment, this disorder may be fatal,163, 164 and it tends to be the

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 683

FIGURE 9-2. A, Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Annular erosions and ulcers bordered by epidermal collarettes in
the inguinal region. B, Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Annular ulcers with collarettes near the anus. C, Ulceration of
the lips, chin, and nasal philtrum of a cat with pemphigus vulgaris. D, Ulceration of the hard and soft palate of a
cat with pemphigus vulgaris. (C and D, from Manning TO, et al: Pemphigus diseases in the feline: Seven case
reports and discussion. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:432, 1982.) E, Multiple crusted erythematous plaques over the
dorsum of a dog with pemphigus vegetans. F, Mutiple crusted, erythematous plaques over the dorsum and side of
a dog with pemphigus vegetans. (E and F, from Scott OW: Pemphigus vegetans in a dog. Cornell Vet 67:374,
1977.) G, Pemphigus foliaceus. Numerous pustules over the thorax. H, Lateral surface of pinna of a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus. Note pustules (early lesions) and yellow crusts (older lesions).

684 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-3. Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Suprabasilar acantholysis and cleft formation. (From Scott DW, et
al: Pemphigus vulgaris without mucosal or mucocutaneous involvement in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
18:401, 1982.)

FIGURE 9-4. Canine pemphigus vulgaris. Suprabasilar cleft with basilar epidermal cells
remaining attached to the dermis like a row of "tombstones." (From Scott DW, et al:
Pemphigus vulgaris without mucosal or mucocutaneous involvement in two dogs. J Am Anim
Hasp Assoc 18:401, 1982.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 685

most difficult form to put into and keep in remission. Systemic glucocorticoids alone or in
combination with azathioprine are the initial treatments of choice in dogs, whereas systemic glucocorticoids alone or in combination with chlorambucil are preferred in cats.
Combination therapy is usually required. Heparin (100 IU/kg q12h subcutaneously) was
shown to have at least a temporary beneficial effect in one medically resistant case of
pemphigus vulgaris. 151

PEMPHIGUS VEGETANS
Pemphigus vegetans has been reported in the dog but is considered to be extremely
rare. 160. 164 In 1998, it was suggested that these cases represent the newly proposed
variant, panepidermal pustular pemphigus, though some clinical features were different.s?
No age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent. Pemphigus vegetans is a vesiculopustular
disorder that evolves into verrucous vegetations and papillomatous proliferations, which
ooze and are studded with pustules (see Fig. 9-2E and F). The Nikolsky sign may be
present. Pruritus and pain are variable, and the dogs are usually otherwise healthy.
Pemphigus vegetans is thought to represent a more benign or abortive form of pemphigus
vulgaris in an animal that has more resistance to the disease.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans includes bacterial and fungal granulomas,
benign familial chronic pemphigus, and cutaneous neoplasia (especially lyrnphoreticular
neoplasia and mast cell tumor).
The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans is based on history, physical examination, direct smears, biopsy, and immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing.
Pemphigus vegetans is characterized histopathologically by papillated epidermal hyperplasia, papillomatosis, and intraepidermal microabscesses that predominantly contain eosinophils and acantholytic keratinocytes (Figs. 9-5 and 9-6).71, 160. 163
Management

Too few cases of pemphigus vegetans have been described for specific recommendations
to be made, but initially, systemic glucocorticoids would be indicated. In one report, three

FIGURE 9-5. Canine pemphigus vegetans. Seven intraepidermal eosinophilic microabscesses. (From Scott OW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphtgoid in dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Oermatol 5:148, 1981.)

686 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-6. Canine pemphigus vegetans. Intraepidermal microabscess containing predominantly eosinophils and a few acantholytic keratinocytes. (From Scott OW: Pemphigus vegetans
in a dog. Cornell Vet 67:.374. 1977.)

cases were mentioned and all responded readily to tapering dosages of glucocorticoids. 36 If
glucocorticoids are not effective, azathioprine would be added.

PANEPIDERMAL PUSTULAR PEMPHIGUS
In a 1991 report, 16 cases of putative pemphigus vegetans were described.v" To us,
however, many of the dogs in these cases appeared to have "deep" pemphigus erythematosus or pemphigus foliaceus. The diagnosis of pemphigus vegetans was based on histopathology because of the presence of pustules in the epidermis and follicular infundibula.
Dunstanv? has referred to this group as having pemphigus vegetans/erythematosus and
considers this entity more similar to human pemphigus vegetans, Hallopeau type. He and
others'?" have proposed the name panepidermal pustular pemphigus. One case evaluated
immunopathologically had autoantibodies against desmoglein I, similar to pemphigus foliaceus.l'" Based on the clinical findings and limited immunopathologic studies, this entity
cannot be distinctly characterized. We still believe that these dogs simply have pemphigus
foliaceus or pemphigus erythematosus.

PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common form of pemphigus and is perhaps the most
common immune-mediated dermatosis in dogs and cats. 55 . 120. 121. 129. 133. 13.5. 147. 1.56 It has
been reported to account for as high as 1% to 1.5% of all cases at a dermatology referral
practice or as low as 0.04% of the hospital canine population." The major pemphigus
foliaceus antigen is desmoglein I, a 150-kd glycoprotein from the cadherin group of
adhesion molecules. 59 . 141 The same antigen is the target of the autoantibodies in the
dog. 138. 168 No age or sex predilections have been reported. In dogs, Akitas, Chow Chows,
Dachshunds, Bearded collies, Newfoundlands, Doberman pinschers, the Finnish spitz, and

'See references 55, 120. 121, 129, 133, 135, 147, 156.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 687

Schipperkes may be predisposed.P 135 The mean age of onset is about 4 years, with 65%
of the affected dogs experiencing disease at 5 years or less. 135
Pemphigus foliaceus is characterized by pustular dermatitis (see Fig. 9-2G). This is
an important differentiation from human pemphigus foliaceus, which starts with erythema
and vesicles and may progress to pustules. Canine and feline pemphigus foliaceus does
not have a vesicular phase-it is a pustular, crusting disease.
Three forms of pemphigus foliaceus appear to exist in the canine. 131 The first is
spontaneous canine pemphigus foliaceus. Akitas and Chow Chows may be prone to this
form. The disease develops in dogs with no previous history of skin disease or drug
exposure. The second form, drug-induced pemphigus foliaceus, may be more common in
Labrador retrievers and Doberman pinschers. Drug-induced pemphigus is becoming more
frequently recognized, with several cases associated with the administration of trimethoprtm/sulfonamides." The third form occurs in dogs with a history of chronic skin disease.
These dogs often have had one or more years of usually pruritic or allergic skin disease.
They suddenly experience "more severe disease with new features" that ends up being
diagnosed as pemphigus foliaceus. These dogs with chronic, disease-associated pemphigus
foliaceus often have been exposed to multiple drugs, so their-disease may occasionally be
drug-induced, though a cause-and-effect relationship is not obvious, nor does the eruption
go away when the drugs are stopped. No seasonality or environmental risk factors were
found in a study of pemphigus foliaceus in dogs and cats. 152
Pemphigus foliaceus usually begins on the face and ears (Fig. 9-7B); it commonly
involves the feet, clawbeds, footpads (villous hyperkeratosis or "hard pad") (see Fig. 9-7C
to E), and groin and becomes multifocal or generalized (see Fig. 9-7A) within 6 months
in many animals. Very early lesions consist of erythematous macules that rapidly progress
through a pustular phase (see Fig. 9-2G) and end up as dry, yellow or honey-colored to
brown crusts (see Fig. 9-2H). There are usually scales, alopecia, and erosions bordered
by epidermal collarettes. The Nikolsky sign may be present. Mucocutaneous orientation is
uncommon, and oral cavity involvement is very rare. Some dogs and cats with pemphigus
foliaceus present with only footpad lesions and may be lame.U" 134 Paronychia and involvement of the nipples are common in cats. 132 Various claw abnormalities (onychodystrophy,
onychorrhexis, onychogryposis) occasionally occur in dogs. Nasal depigmentation is common and may result in photodermatitis (see the following discussion of pemphigus erythematosus). Pruritus and pain are variable, and secondary bacterial pyoderma and peripheral
lymphadenopathy may be present. Severely affected animals may be anorectic, depressed,
or febrile. The disease commonly has a waxing/waning course. There may be hours to
days when numerous new pustules form, followed by days to weeks of crusting during
which few new lesions are found.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of pemphigus foliaceus includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, dermatophilosis, seborrheic skin disease, benign familial chronic
pemphigus, pemphigus erythematosus, discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, and cutaneous adverse drug reaction. Dermatophytosis can mimic the histopathology as well as the clinical findings (see Chap. 5).153 In addition, pemphigus foliaceus
could be confused with subcorneal pustular dermatosis, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis,
linear IgA pustular dermatosis, necrolytic migratory erythema, leishmaniasis, and zincresponsive dermatitis.
The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus foliaceus is based on history, physical examination, direct smears, skin biopsy, immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing, and
demonstration of the antigen being targeted (desmoglein I). Pemphigus foliaceus is characterized histologically by intragranular or sub corneal acantholysis with resultant cleft and
vesicle or pustule formation (Figs. 9-8 and 9_9).22. 71, 164 Within the vesicle or pustule,
cells from the stratum granulosum may be attached to the overlying stratum corneum
"See references 11, 49, 52, 252, 269, 286, 287.

688 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-7. Legend on opposite page

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 689

FIGURE 9-8. Canine pemphigus foliaceus. Numerous neutrophils and acantholytic keratinocytes within a subcomeal pustule. (From Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigOid in dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Derrnatol 5:148, 1981.)

(granular cell "cling-ens") (Fig. 9-lOA and B). Either neutrophils or eosinophils may
predominate within the vesicle or pustule. Other helpful histopathologic findings in canine
and feline pemphigus foliaceus are (1) eosinophilic exocytosis and microabscess formation
within the epidermis or follicular outer root sheath or both, (2) frequent involvement of
the follicular outer root sheath in the acantholytic and pustular process, and (3) acantholytic, dyskeratotic granular epidermal cells ("grains") at the surface of erosions (Fig. 9-11).
Management

The initial treatment of choice for pemphigus foliaceus depends on the clinical presentation. Milder localized cases may be treated with topical steroids, whereas more extensive
disease is usually treated with oral prednisone. 156, 164 The induction dose should be maintained until the disease is inactive, though alopecia and residual crusts may be present.
After induction, the dosage is tapered to an alternate-day regimen. In cats, patients failing
to respond to prednisone may respond to dexamethasone (0.2 to 0.4 mglkg q24h) or
triamcinolone (0.4 to 0.8 mglkg q24h) and can be safely maintained by administration of
either product every second or third day. It has been suggested that oral triamcinolone
may be superior to prednisone and prednisolone; however, this needs to be evaluated.P!
Oral glucocorticoids are ineffective or unsatisfactory in at least 50% of cases. In the dog,
the next most common treatment is the addition of azathioprine for combination immunosuppressive therapy. In the cat, chlorambucil or chrysotherapy is used. If dogs do not

FIGURE 9-7. A, Pemphigus foliaceus. Generalized papules, pustules, erosions, and crusts. B, Pemphigus foliaceus. Note
symmetric dermatitis involving bridge of the nose and periocular regions. C, Hyperkeratosis of the footpads in a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus. D, Hyperkeratosis of the footpads in a cat with pemphigus foliaceus. E, Pustule on footpad of a cat
with pemphigus foliaceus. F, Erythema, alopecia, erosion, and crusting of the face and ear of a cat with pemphigus
erythematosus. (From Scott DW, et aI: Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:815,
1980.) G, Nasal erythema, ulceration, crusting, and depigmentation in a dog with pemphigus erythematosus. H, Pemphigus
erythematosus demonstrating nasal depigmentation without crusting-typical of discoid lupus erythematosus-and crusted
areas on nasal planum and pinna-suggestive of pemphigus foliaceus.

690 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-9. Canine pemphigus foliaceus. Numerous acantholytic keratinocytes within subcomeal
pustule.

respond to azathioprine and glucocorticoids, gold salt injections may be warranted, but
only after waiting for 4 weeks after discontinuing the azathioprine." It has been stated
that about 10% of patients with canine and feline pemphigus foliaceus fail to respond to
any treatment and are euthanized.P"

PEMPHIGUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Pemphigus erythematosus is thought to represent a more benign form of pemphigus
foliaceus.!" 128. 164 Some workers have also suggested it may represent a crossover syndrome between pemphigus and lupus erythematosus because of histopathologic and immunopathologic findings. It has also been suggested to be a mild form of pemphigus
foliaceus. The antigen target has not been definitely identified in humans or dogs though,
in humans, it is believed to be similar to pemphigus foliaceus.!" 59 Pemphigus erythematosus has been reported in dogs and cats.5,5, 161, 164 No age or sex predilections are known. In
dogs, collies and German shepherds may be predisposed.55 This disease has been considered to be photoaggravated in some cases, similar to canine discoid lupus erythematosus.
This was confirmed in a study demonstrating in vivo and in vitro sensitivity to UVB.139
Pemphigus erythematosus is characterized by erythematous, pustular dermatitis of the
face and ears (see Fig. 9-7F). Because the primary lesions are transient, dogs and cats
typically present with oozing crusts, scales, alopecia, and erosions bordered by epidermal
collarettes. The Nikolsky sign is infrequently present. Pruritus and pain are variable. The
disease involves, and is often limited to, the facial/nasal region. The nose frequently
becomes depigmented, whereupon photodermatitis becomes an aggravating factor (see

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 691

FIGURE 9-10. Canine pemphigus foliaceus. A, Early pallor and intragranular cleft formation (arrow). B, Intragranular
acantholysis produces a "subcorneal" pustule with numerous keratinocytes from the stratum granulosum still adherent
(granular "cling-ons") to the overlying stratum corneum (arrow).

FIGURE 9-1 I. Canine pemphigus erythematosus. Acantholytic keratinocytes ("grains")
within stratum granulosum at the surface of an erosion. (From Scott DW, Lewis RM:
Pemphigus and pemphigoid in dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 5:
148, 1981.)

692 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
Fig. 9-7G and H). If the nasal region is primarily involved, the condition is often worse
in sunny weather and the dog may be misdiagnosed as having nasal solar dermatitis
("collie nose"). Often the depigmentation is an early sign in pemphigus erythematosus.
This is in contrast with pemphigus foliaceus, wherein the depigmentation comes later. In
addition, the crusting is often milder than what occurs in pemphigus foliaceus. Oral cavity
involvement has not been reported, and affected animals are usually otherwise healthy.
Occasional animals have isolated skin lesions distant from the face and ears, such as on
the paws or genitalia.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of pemphigus erythematosus includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, benign familial chronic pemphigus, facial pemphigus foliaceus,
discoid and systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, drug reaction, leishmaniasis,
and zinc-responsive dermatitis.
The definitive diagnosis of pemphigus erythematosus is based on history, physical
examination, direct smears, skin biopsy, and immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical
testing. Pemphigus erythematosus is histologically identical to pemphigus foliaceus, except
that it often has a lichenoid cellular infiltrate of mononuclear cells, plasma cells, and
neutrophils or eosinophils or both (Fig. 9-12). Immunopathologically these cases may
have a low positive antinuclear antibody titer and basement membrane immunoglobulin
deposition. 55

FIGURE 9-12. Canine pemphigus erythematosus. Note the combination of histopathologic patterns: intraepidermal pustular dermatitis with numerous acantholytic keratinocytes (upper arrow),
and interface dermatitis (lower arrow).

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 693
Management

The initial therapeutic options for pemphigus erythematosus are different than for most
immune-mediated diseases. This is an important reason to try to establish a definitive
diagnosis rather than just a diagnosis of "pemphigus."
Pemphigus erythematosus may initially be treated with sun avoidance and topical
glucocorticoids. In dogs, the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide is effective in up
to 25% of cases. If this combination is not effective, vitamin E, then a short course of
systemic glucocorticoids, may be added to the regimen. Once in remission, the initial
therapeutic protocols may be effective in keeping the disease in remission. Topical cyclosporine has also been helpful in some cases.

PARANEOPLASTIC PEMPHIGUS
This form of pemphigus was first characterized in humans in 1990 and recently described
in dogs. 123. 125. 143. 171 The diagnostic criteria established in humans include severe oral
ulceration with polymorphous skin eruptions; histology that includes intraepithelial acantholysis, keratinocyte apoptosis, and vacuolar interface changes; direct immunofluorescence
testing findings that include the intercellular deposition of IgG within the epithelium and
C3 in a granular pattern along the basement membrane zone; and indirect immunofluorescence findings that include IgG deposition in the intercellular spaces on monkey
esophagus and rodent urinary bladder.F" The immunofluorescence findings on rodent
urinary bladder have a specificity of 83% and a sensitivity of 75%; thus, false-positive and
false-negative results OCCUr. 15.5 Immunoprecipitation studies are needed to confirm the
diagnosis by identifying the characteristic antigen complex: desmoplakins I (250 kd) and II
(210 kd), bullous pemphigoid antigen I (230 kd), envoplakin (210 kd), periplakin (190 kd),
desmoglein III (130 kd), and an unidentified (170 kd) transmembrane antigen. 155 Antibodies from human patients reproduce the cutaneous lesions when injected into newborn
mice.P?

The pathogenesis of paraneoplastic pemphigus is unknown. It has been hypothesized
that antitumor immune responses cross-react with normal epithelial proteins, perhaps
associated with anomalous expression of desmosomes and/or desmoplakins by the neoplasms and/or dysregulated cytokine production (e.g., IL-6) by neoplastic cells. 155 Autoantibodies against desmoglein III and the 170-kd protein probably initiate acantholysis and
cell membrane damage, resulting in autoantibody formation against desmoplakins. The
antidesmoplakin antibodies then enter keratinocytes and bind target autoantigens by an
epitope-spreading phenomenon.
A canine case was shown to have three serum autoantibodies important in human
paraneoplastic pemphigus: antibodies that recognize the 21O-kd, 190-kd, and 170-kd proteins. 125 The best documented canine case had a concurrent lymphoma.r'" Two cases of
pemphigus foliaceus were suspected to be paraneoplastic pemphigus. One was associated
with a Sertoli cell tumor,'?' the other was associated with a mammary carcinoma.V' In
humans, paraneoplastic pemphigus is usually associated with malignancies, especially lymphomas (Table 9-2).155 Unless the associated neoplasm can be cured, immunosuppressive
therapy is not very effective. 155 . 159

• Table 9-2

NEOPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH HUMAN
PARANEOPLASTIC PEMPHIGUS

LYMPHOCYTIC NEOPLASIA

NONLYMPHOCYTIC NEOPLASIA

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Castleman's tumor
Thymoma
Hodgkin's disease
T cell lymphoma

Poorly differentiated sarcoma
Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia
Inflammatory fibrosarcoma
Bronchogenic squamous cell carcinoma
Round cell liposarcoma

694 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

Autoimmune Subepidermal Bullous Dermatoses
The classification of autoimmune blistering diseases is based on the antigen(s) targeted by
pathogenic autoantibodies. The autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases represent different nosologic entities. 18, 51, 185, 191 Studies conducted by Olivry and colleagues have
demonstrated that canine subepidermal bullous diseases include bullous pemphigoid (autoantibodies against bullous pemphigoid antigen 2 [Type XVII collagen]), epidermolysis
bullosa acquisita (autoantibodies against Type VII collagen), bullous systemic lupus erythematosus (IgG autoantibodies against the noncollagenous aminoterminus of Type VII collagen), linear IgA bullous dermatosis (IgA and IgG autoantibodies against the extracellular
portion of bullous pemphigoid antigen 2, from which the intracellular, transmembrane,
and NCI6A domains have been removed by proteolysis), and mucous membrane pemphigold (autoantibodies against a 97-kd antigen-possibly the C-terminus of bullous pemphigOid antigen 2-in the lower lamina lucida).51, 183, 191 These entities are similar clinically,
histopathologically, and on routine immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing.
However, they are different diseases, and studies of larger numbers of cases may reveal
important prognostic and therapeutic differences.
The use of salt-split skin as a substrate for indirect immunofluorescence testing is a
practical contribution to the study of autoimmune subepidermal bullous diseases. 175, 191 A
l-molar solution of NaCl splits skin through the lamina lucida, allowing the recognition of
autoantibodies that bind to the roof (epidermal), floor (dermal), or combined both sides of
the split.

BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
Bullous pemphigoid is a very rare autoimmune, vesiculobullous, ulcerative disorder of skin
or oral mucosa or both that has been reported in dogs, cats, and humans.I" 47, 180, 184, 185 It
has been reported to account for 0.01% to 0.1% of all canine dermatology cases.56, 59
However, it should be noted that the majority of reported cases were diagnosed on the
basis of clinical, histopathologic, and immunopathologic findings, not on the basis of the
specific antigen being targeted. It is likely that some of these cases were not true bullous
pemphigoid as determined by the presence of autoantibodies to specific bullous pemphigoid antigens. Olivry has studied the immunopathology and antigen targeting of 20 dogs
with subepidermal blistering diseases: Only 15% had true bullous pemphigoid, suggesting
that this disease is even rarer than previously thought. 183
Cause and Pathogenesis

Bullous pemphigoid is characterized histologically by subepidermal vesicle formation and
immunologlcally by the presence of one or two autoantibodies against antigens at the basal
cell hemidesmosomes of skin and mucosa.v 18 The bullous pemphigoid antigens are
present in all mammalian and avian skin and are associated with hemidesmosomes and the
lamina lucida of the basement membrane.P- 179
The first antigen is bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 (BPAg 1, BP230), which is a 230-kd
intracellular antigen that is a homolog to desmoplakin J.l8, 188 Serum antibodies to this
antigen have not yet been described in animals. The second bullous pemphigoid antigen
(BPAg 2, BPI80), also called collagen XVII, is a I80-kd hemidesmosomal transmembranous molecule.l'" In humans, circulating IgE and IgG4 autoantibodies are the major
immunoglobulins preferentially targeting two distinct epitopes on BPI80, and the levels of
these autoantibodies parallel disease activity.178a Canine and feline cases of bullous pemphigoid exhibit antibodies to this latter molecule.P" 177, 184, 185 The cause of antibody
production is still unknown, but genetic factors have been determined in humans and
dogs.
The proposed pathomechanism of blister formation in bullous pemphigoid is as follows: (1) the binding of complement-fixing pemphigoid antibody to the antigen of the
hemidesmosomes, (2) complement fixation and activation, (3) activation of mast cells and
release of chemotactic cytokines, (4) chemoattraction of neutrophils and eosinophils, and

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 695

(5) release of proteolytic enzymes from the infiltrating leukocytes, which disrupt
derma-epidermal cohesion, resulting in derma-epidermal separation and vesicle formation.f 18. 47. 176 In humans, elevated concentrations of eosinophil cationic protein, major
basic protein, and neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase and elastase were detected in blister fluid and serum of patients with bullous pemphigoid, suggesting that the release of
these substances from activated granulocytes may be important in the pathogenesis of
blister formation.F" An eosinophil-derived enzyme, gelatinase, may be involved in cleaving
the Type XVII collagen. 177. 187 Human pemphigoid antibodies, when injected into rabbit
cornea or guinea pig skin, locally produce the clinical, histologic, and immunopathologic
features of bullous pemphigoid." 18
Other factors thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of some cases of bullous
pemphigoid are drug provocation (especially sulfonamides, penicillins, and furosemide)
and ultraviolet light. 5. 18. 157. 186 Bullous pemphigoid-like drug eruptions have been reported in dogs, though the exact antigenic target was not determined and these cases may
not have been true bullous pemphigoid. 268. 269. 282
Clinical variants occur in humans, and their differentiation is proceeding based on the
more advanced methods of detecting target antigens. The past confusion and overlap
between some of these "variants" -such as cicatricial pemphigoid and herpes gestationis,
which do share, at least partially, the target antigens noted in bullous pemphigoid-are
beginning to be worked out. 181. 188. 190 This also is the case in the canine, wherein Olivry's
group has recognized mucous membrane pemphigoid. This disease has been known as
cicatricial pemphigoid in humans and is still the name preferred by some investigators.P?
Mucous membrane pemphigoid is one of the most common forms of autoimmune basement membrane zone disease in dogs. 183 It is phenotypically distinct, yet immunologically
heterogeneous, as in humans. Six cases of mucous membrane pemphigoid have been
recognized in dogs: four of them exhibited antibodies against the NC16A domain of
BP180 and one of them had antibodies against the C-terminus of BP180. 183
Clinical Features

Bullous pemphigoid is very rare in the dog, accounting for about 0.1% of all canine skin
disorders at one university small animal clinic'" and 0.01% of all canine dermatology cases
at another.59 Canine bullous pemphigoid has no reported age or sex predilections, although collies and, perhaps, Doberman pinschers appear to be predisposed to it,47. 182. 186
The disease in collies and shelties must be separated from so-called ulcerative dermatosis
of collies and Shetland sheepdogs (probably vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosusl.P"
Bullous pemphigoid is a vesiculobullous, ulcerative disorder that may affect the oral
cavity, mucocutaneous junctions, skin, or any combination thereof (Fig. 9-13A and B).
About 80% of affected dogs have oral cavity lesions at the time of diagnosis. In Olivry's
confirmed cases of canine bullous pemphigoid, only one third exhibited oral involvement,
which is in contrast with cases of canine mucous membrane pemphigoid that exhibit
consistent mucosal involvement with no or minimal skin lesions.l'" Oral cavity involvement
has been recognized either after or at the same time as the cutaneous signs and rarely as
the initial event. Cutaneous lesions occur most commonly in the axillae and groin, also the
common sites for vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of collies and Shetland sheepdogs. Ulcerative paronychia, onychomadesis, or footpad ulceration may occur.
An insidious, chronic, clinically benign form of cutaneous bullous pemphigoid has
been recognized in dogs, with lesions confined to the axillae, groin, or isolated mucocutaneous areas such as the anus and prepuce.f" 186 Cases of bullous pemphigoid may be
severe and clinically indistinguishable from pemphigus vulgaris and other subepidermal
blistering diseases. In true bullous pemphigoid, the vesicles and bullae are less fragile and
transient than those occurring in vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of collies and
sheepdogs.l'" In contrast with the flaccid blisters of pemphigus vulgaris, the blisters of
bullous pemphigoid are tense. 183 The presence of intact vesicles or bullae is more suggestive of subepidermal bullous diseases and, with further study, we will hopefully be able to
better clinically differentiate these diseases. When vesicles and bullae have ruptured, the

696 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-13. Legend on opposite page

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 697
clinician sees ulcers bordered by epithelial collarettes. The pseudo-Nikolsky sign may be
present.
Pruritus and pain are variable, and secondary bacterial pyoderma is common. Severely
affected dogs may be anorectic, depressed, or febrile and may die because of fluid,
electrolyte, and protein imbalances and septicemia.
Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram, serum chemistries, urinalysis,
serum protein electrophoresis) are nonspecific, often revealing mild to moderate leukocytosis and neutrophilia, mild nonregenerative anemia, mild hypoalbuminemia, and mild to
moderate elevations of a 2 , f3, and 'Y globulins.55. 186 Peripheral eosinophilia is rare. 55. 186
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes pemphigus vulgaris, systemic lupus erythematosus,
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, linear IgA bullous dermatosis, erythema multiforme, toxic
epidermal necrolysis, idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus) of collies and Shetland sheepdogs, drug reaction, epitheliotropic lymphoma, candidiasis, and the numerous causes of canine ulcerative stomatitis. Definitive diagnosis of
bullous pemphigoid is based on history, physical examination, skin (or mucosal) biopsy,
demonstration of basement membrane fixed autoantibodies, and circulating antibodies that
target the bullous pemphigoid antigens. Microscopic examination of direct smears from
intact vesicles, bullae, or recent ulcers does not reveal acantholytic keratinocytes.
Bullous pemphigoid is characterized histologically by subepidermal cleft and vesicle
formation (Figs. 9-14 and 9_15).18.22.47, 186 Acantholysis does not occur. Inflammatory
infiltrates vary from mild and perivascular to marked and lichenoid (Fig. 9-16). Tissue
eosinophilia is common in canine bullous pemphigoid. In contrast, cases of mucous
membrane pemphigoid have noninflammatory blisters, and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
cases have neutrophil-rich vesicles.P" 191 Feline bullous pemphigoid has only a few eosinophils. 184 Subepidermal vacuolar alteration (subepidermal "bubblies") has been suggested as
the earliest prevesicle histopathologic finding." Olivry thinks that the first lesion of canine
bullous pemphigoid might be eosinophil degranulation at the basement membrane zone
(Fig. 9 -17) .183
Electron-microscopic examination of pemphigoid lesions has revealed the following
features: smudging, thickening, and interruption of the basement membrane zone; fragmentation and disappearance of anchoring fibrils, anchoring filaments, and hemidesmosomes; basal cell degeneration; and separation occurring within the lamina lucida.f" 186
Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing reveals a linear deposition of immunoglobulin, and usually complement, at the basement membrane zone of skin
or mucosa in 50% to 90% of patients (see Fig. 9-1C).5, 18,55, 186 However, this is not
specific for bullous pemphigoid. Complement component C3 is the most commonly
demonstrated immunoreactant. The presence of IgG is expected.P" 184. 185 It would
appear to be important to test with all classes of immunoglobulins, because in some dogs,
results are positive for only IgM or IgA (though in light of the more recent studies,
these cases may not have truly been bullous pemphigoid). It is also important to sample
intact vesicles and bullae as well as perilesional tissue. Indirect immunofluorescence
testing frequently yielded negative results in the past, though a definitive diagnosis should
include the demonstration of circulating IgG autoantibodies to the bullous pemphigoid
antigen(s).180,185 In one study, the IgG subtypes were predominantly IgG2 or IgG4,13

FIGURE 9-13. A, Bullae on the labial mucosa of a dog with bullous pemphigoid. (From Scott DW, Lewis RM:
Pemphigus and pemphigoid in dog and man. Comparative aspects. Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.) B, Canine bullous
pemphigoid. Severe ulcerative stomatitis and cheilitis. C, Systemic lupus erythematosus in a dog with arthritis and
generalized erythematous, alopecic, and focally ulcerative skin lesions. D, Alopecia, erythema, crusting, and depigmentation
of the face and ear of a cat with systemic lupus erythematosus. E, Bacterial paronychia in a cat with systemic lupus
erythematosus. (D and E, from Scott DW, et al: A glucocorticoid-responsive dermatitis in cats, resembling systemic lupus
erythematosus in man. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:157, 1979.) F, Erythema, alopeica, and ulceration of the hind leg of a
dog with systemic lupus erythematosus. G, Ulcerated footpads of a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus. H, Necrosis of
the margin of the pinna in a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus.

698 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-14. Canine bullous pemphigoid. Subepidermal vesicle and lichenoid band of
inflammatory cells. (From Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigoid in dog and
man: Comparative aspects, J Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.)

Clinical Management

The natural course of untreated cases is unclear. Veterinarians have long recognized
refractory mucocutaneous ulcerative disorders that resulted in the death or euthanasia of
affected dogs. Retrospectively, some of these dogs may have had bullous pemphigoid. On
the basis of the small number of cases documented in the veterinary literature, canine
bullous pemphigoid is usually a severe disease. The prognosis for true bullous pemphigoid
is not yet established, but it appears to be a more localized and more benign disease than
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.P" Extensive cases may be fatal unless treated. Therapy of
canine bullous pemphigoid may be difficult, requiring large doses of systemic glucocorticoids with or without other potent immunomodulating drugs. In one study of nine dogs

FIGURE 9-1 S. Feline bullous
pemphigoid. Subepidermal vesicle,
cell-poor. (Courtesy Dr. T. Olivry.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 699

FIGURE 9-16. Canine bullous pemphigoid. Subepidermal vacuolar alteration (subepidermal "bubblies") and lichenoid band of inflammatory cells.

with subepidermal blistering disease believed to be bullous pemphigoid.l'" the following
observations were made: 1 mglkg prednisolone, given orally q12h, was ineffective for
controlling the disease, and 3 mglkg prednisolone, given orally q 12h, was effective for
controlling the disease. Two of the nine dogs requiring the larger dose were euthanized,
however, because of unacceptable side effects, and another two died after 7 to 10 days of
therapy (from acute pancreatitis). Thus, systemic glucocorticoids were unsatisfactory for
treatment in four of nine dogs (44%).

FIGURE 9-17. Canine bullous pemphigoid. Subepidermal vacuolar alteration.

700 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

Suspected bullous pemphigoid cases have, in our experience, usually required combinations of immunosuppressive agents. One case (seen by GE.G.) even required glucocorticoids, azathioprine, and chlorambucil to be kept in remission. Therapy usually must be
maintained for prolonged periods if not for life. Thus, the therapeutic regimen must be
individualized for each patient, and owner education is essential. Mild cases of canine
bullous pemphigoid may be successfully managed with topical glucocorticoids or relatively
low doses of systemic glucocorticoids (2.2 mg/kg/day of prednisolone or prednisone orally
for induction), and therapy may occasionally even be terminated. 55, 186
Tetracycline and erythromycin have been reported to be beneficial in the treatment of
bullous pemphigoid in humans.l" 189 It is thought that the benefit derived from these
drugs is related to their ability to inhibit neutrophil chemotaxis and random migration and
to increase dermo-epidermal cohesion and inhibit proteases that might be involved in
blister formation.
Because (1) cutaneous lesions of bullous pemphigoid in humans can be induced by
exposure to ultraviolet light and (2) canine bullous pemphigoid may worsen with exposure
to ultraviolet light, it may be prudent to avoid direct exposure to sunlight between 8 AM
and 5 PM. 18, 47, 186 The limited number of identified cases of true canine bullous pemphigoid have not been photosensittve.l'" Until a definitive diagnosis is made, sun avoidance
still should be recommended.

EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA ACQUISITA
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita is a subepidermal blistering disease. It is thought to be
one of the most common causes of autoimmune subepidermal blistering in dogs (25% of
the cases).183 In humans, it is an acquired autoimmune disease that was clinically similar
to the childhood form of epidermolysis bullosa-hence the name-even though it is not
hereditary or a disease typically found in children.l'" It is characterized by the chronic
development of subepidermal blisters that may be induced by trauma and by fragile skin.
In humans, the epidermal separation was similar to that of bullous pemphigoid, and even
direct immunofluorescence test findings were similar.l'" Immunoelectron microscopy revealed the antibody deposits to be located at the anchoring fibrils, separating this disease
from bullous pemphigoid. Subsequent studies have shown that the autoantibodies target
type VII collagen within the anchoring fibrils of the basement membrane zone.l'"
A case of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita was described in a L-year-old, intact male
Great Dane that experienced an acute onset and rapid progression of skin lesions.l'"
There was generalized urticaria, vesiculation, and cutaneous sloughing, resulting in ulcers.
Ulcerations were most pronounced in the oral cavity (Fig. 9-18) and on the footpads.

FIGURE 9- I 8. Canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Severe ulceration of oral cavity. (Courtesy Dr. T.
Olivry.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 70 I
The dog was also febrile and lethargic. Treatment with prednisone (5 mglkglday), antibiotics, and dapsone was not satisfactory, so euthanasia was performed at the owner's request.
Histopathology and collagen IV staining revealed that the subepidermal vesicles were
occurring in the sublamina densa (Fig. 9-19). A mild, bandlike infiltrate of neutrophils
and lymphocytes was visible at the base of subepidermal vesicles. In more severe lesions,
neutrophil microabscesses were visible in the superficial dermis. Direct immunofluorescence testing revealed IgG, IgM, IgA, and C3 at the basement membrane zone. Indirect
immunofluorescence testing (IgG and IgA at the basement membrane zone of dog lip and
tongue, but not with monkey esophagus), indirect protein A immunogold electron microscopy, Western immunoblotting, and recombinant collagen VII-NCI enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were all used to confirm that the autoantibodies targeted collagen VII in the anchoring fibrils. 191• 192a Olivry has recognized four more cases, and four of
the five dogs exhibited a generalized phenotype that did not respond to treatment.l'" One
dog had a localized variant (predominantly head region) that responded completely to
prednisone (2 mglkglday), thus resembling the Brunsting-Perry epidermolysis bullosa acquisita in humans.P"
LINEAR IgA BULLOUS DERMATOSIS

A 3-year-old, spayed female mongrel dog was presented for vesicles, erosions, ulcers, and
crusts on the lips, pinnae, axillae, sternum, groin, extremities, footpads, and tongue. 51
Histologic examination revealed mixed inflammatory, hemorrhagic, subepidermal vesicles.
Circulating IgA and IgG autoantibodies targeted the 120-kd linear IgA bullous dermatosis
antigen (LAD-I) in the upper lamina lucida.
MUCOUS MEMBRANE PEMPHIGOID

A l-year-old, intact male Australian shepherd was presented for vesicles, erosions, and
crusts on the periorbital, perinasal, and pinnal skin as well as the oral mucosa." Histologic
examination revealed large subepidermal vesicles and focal neutrophilic subepidermal
microabscesses. Circulating IgG autoantibodies targeted a 97-kd antigen in the lower
lamina lucida.

Lupus Erythematosus
Lupus erythematosus is a term that encompasses a group of diseases that have different
clinical syndromes that share a similar underlying autoimmune process.s!" The appropriate
terminology and classification of the syndromes and cases with these disorders have led to,

FIGURE 9-19. Canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Subepidermal
clefting and neutrophil infiltrate.
(Courtesy Dr. T. Olivry.)

704 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
regulate cell proliferation and downregulate bcl-2) and a marked decrease in bcl-2 (a
protein that promotes cell survival and inhibits apoptosis). It was hypothesized that basal
keratinocytes, damaged by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, become hyperproliferative (thus expressing Ki-67), which induces the expression of p53 which, in tum, downregulates bcl-2 and activates an apoptotic pathway in the epidermis.

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Systemic lupus erythematosus is the most severe form of the lupus diseases because it
involves more than cutaneous lesions and may present with a wide array of clinical
symptoms that reflect multiple organ or tissue damage.
Cause and Pathogenesis

The etiology of systemic lupus erythematosus appears to be multifactorial, with genetic
predilection, immunologic disorder (T cell deficiency, B cell hyperactivity, deficiencies of
complement components), viral infection, and hormonal and ultraviolet light modulation
all playing a role. 5, IB, 47, 193, 195, 199, 20B B lymphocyte hyperactivity results in a plethora of
autoantibodies formed against numerous body constituents. The most well-studied are the
ANA, which are found in up to 100% of the cases reported. The study of these antibodies
utilizing newer techniques, such as immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation, has revealed
that a number of nuclear components are targeted, including double-stranded DNA,
histones, and extractable nuclear antigens. 195, 209, 220, 226 These latter may be more important in the dog and include a group of ribonuclear proteins (RNPs), the small nuclear
RNP complexes (snRNPs), and heterogeneous nuclear RNPs (hnRNPs).195,226
Studies in dogs with systemic lupus have showed that, in the active phase of disease,
there is a marked lymphopenia that, though it affects both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
more severely involves CD8+ cells.P' This results in an altered (increased) CD4ICD8
ratio (mean of 6 with disease; mean of 2.3 in normals). The decrease in CD8+ T
lymphocytes is directly related to disease severity, and an increase in these cells is
associated with a good response to therapy. Additionally, the percentage of active phase T
cells increases with successful treatment.P' This T cell imbalance persisted in cases of
spontaneous inactivity or treated dogs that responded poorly but normalized in dogs that
responded well to treatment.P'
In humans, a number of drugs (especially procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, penicillamine, several anticonvulsants, and contraceptives) are known to precipitate or exacerbate systemic lupus erythematosus.v IB Vaccination with a modified live virus product
containing distemper, hepatitis, parainfluenza, and parvovirus antigens was suspected to
have precipitated systemic lupus erythematosus in a dog. 47 Tissue damage in systemic
lupus erythematosus appears to be due to a Type III hypersensitivity reaction. The New
Zealand black mouse, the Fl hybrid of the New Zealand black mouse, and the New
. Zealand white mouse experience a lupus-like disease that has many similarities to systemic
lupus erythematosus in humans.v IB, 47, 216
In the dog, the serologic abnormalities associated with spontaneous canine systemic
lupus erythematosus can be transmitted both to normal dogs and to mice by means of
cell-free extracts, thus suggesting an infective agent. 25, 47 As yet, however, none of these
dogs has developed overt systemic lupus erythematosus, indicating that other factors are
involved in the pathogenesis of the clinical entity. It has been reported that dogs with
systemic lupus erythematosus have lower levels of circulating thymic factors than do
normal dogs, analogous to the situation in humans. is, 47, 195
In a colony of dogs obtained by the mating of a male and female, each having
systemic lupus erythematosus, the Fl generation had no clinical signs; with subsequent
breeding, a few dogs in the F2 generation were affected; and clinical signs were common
and marked in the F3 generation. 202 Affected dogs had depressed suppressor T cell
activity, decreased levels of serum thymulin, and a decreased percentage of circulating T
cells.202

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 705

In the colony of dogs at Lyon, France, greater than 50% of the dogs are ANA
carriers, and 25% to 30% of the dogs experience disease.P" In the same colony, there is a
strong association between dog leukocyte antigen (DLA) phenotypes and the occurrence
of systemic lupus erythematosus (DLA-A7 positively associated, DLA-Al and DLA-B5
negatively associatedl.P" 222 A high incidence (47.6%) of ANA positivity was also found in
an English Cocker spaniel breeding colony.l'"
Clinical Features

The clinical signs associated with systemic lupus erythematosus are varied and changeable.
Because of this phenomenal clinical variability and ability to mimic numerous diseases,
systemic lupus erythematosus has been called the "great imitator."
• Dog. Systemic lupus erythematosus is an uncommon disease in dogs. 25 , 47, 56, 217 The
incidence has been estimated at 0.03% of the canine population. 195, 217 There is no age
predilection (average, 5 years) and, at least in some studies, males have been overrepresented at a ratio of 7:3.195 Breed predilections have also been described for collies,
Shetland sheepdogs, Poodles, and German shepherd dogs.47, 195. 217 The most common
manifestations are fever (constant or irregularly cyclic), polyarthritis (nonerosive, nondeforming), proteinuria (>0.5 gIL), and skin disease, being present in greater than 50% of
cases.v- 195,217 Consequent muscle wasting can make the dogs look much older than they
are. Other relatively common manifestations include anemia, leukopenia, peripheral lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and oral ulcers.f"- 195,217 Other syndromes reported in association with canine systemic lupus erythematosus are pericarditis, thrombocytopenia, polymyositis, myocarditis, pneumonitis, pleuritis, neurologic disorders (seizures, meningitis,
myelitis, psychoses, polyneuropathy), and lymphedema.
The cutaneous manifestations of canine systemic lupus erythematosus are extremely
diverse. They include seborrheic skin disease, alopecia, diffuse or regional erythema,
cutaneous or mucocutaneous vesiculobullous or ulcerative disorders, footpad ulcers and
hyperkeratosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, refractory secondary bacterial pyodermas,
panniculitis (lupus profundus), and nasal dermatitis (see Fig. 9-13C, F to H).47, 195,217 Skin
lesions may be multifocal or generalized and commonly involve areas of skin poorly
protected by hair: face (especially nose, lips, pinnae if erect), limbs (especially cranial
aspect of thoracic limbs), axillae, groin, and ventral abdomen. They may be exacerbated or
induced by exposure to sunlight. Pruritus is variable, and scarring is common. Occasionally, dogs experience acute facial or hemifacial edema.
A 4-year-old, castrated male Bichon Frise with systemic lupus erythematosus had
erosions and ulcers of lips, external auditory meati, lateral thorax, axillae, prepuce, metatarsi, and footpads.s! 213 Histopathologic findings were early noninflammatory subepidermal blisters and late subepidermal vesicles with subjacent neutrophils. IgG autoantibodies
against the noncollagenous aminoterminus of type VII collagen (bullous systemic lupus
erythematosus antigen) were detected. It was suggested that this was analogous to socalled type I -bullous systemic lupus erythematosus in humans.
• Cat. Systemic lupus erythematosus is rarely reported in cats. 56 , 214, 225 The incidence
has been estimated to be 0.06% of all feline hospital visits.214 There is no apparent sex
predilection, and affected cats range from 1 to 12 years old. Siamese, Persian, and
Himalayan cats may be predisposed. Syndromes reported include hematologic abnormalities, neurologic or behavioral abnormalities, fever, lymphadenopathy, polyarthritis, myopathy, oral ulceration, conjunctivitis, renal failure, and subclinical pulmonary disease.
About 20% of affected cats have cutaneous lesions. 56, 214, 225 Dermatologic abnormalities include seborrheic skin disease, exfoliative erythroderma, and erythematous, scaling,
crusting, alopecic, scarring dermatitis most commonly involving the face (see Fig. 9-13D),
pinnae, and paws (see Fig. 9-13E).
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of cutaneous systemic lupus erythematosus is lengthy, owing to
the varied and changeable cutaneous manifestations of the disorder. Typical alternative

706 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

diagnoses are seborrheic skin disease, dermatophytosis, bacterial folliculitis, demodicosis,
food hypersensitivity, scabies, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, discoid lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme, necrolytic migratory
erythema, leishmaniasis, toxic epidermal necrolysis, candidiasis, and epitheliotropic lymphoma.
The definitive diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus is often one of the most
challenging tasks in medicine. The disease is so variable in its clinicopathologic presentations that any dogmatic diagnostic categorization is impossible. The clinicopathologic abnormalities that are demonstrated depend on the organ systems involved and may include
anemia (nonregenerative or hemolytic) with or without a positive direct Coombs' test
result, thrombocytopenia with or without a positive platelet factor-3 test result or antiplatelet antibody, leukopenia or leukocytosis, proteinuria, hypergammaglobulinemia (polyclonal), and sterile synovial exudate obtained by arthrocentesis.f": 205 A positive lupus-type
anticoagulant test result was reported in a dog with hemolysis, pulmonary thromboembolism, nephrotic syndrome, polyarthropathy, and thrombocytopenia.P' The lupus erythematosus (LE) cell test may yield a positive result in up to 60% of patients, but it is variable
from day to day, is steroid-labile, and lacks sensitivity and specificity. The assay has been
discontinued in many of the leading laboratories in human medicine.f?
The ANA test is currently considered the most sensitive serologic test for systemic
lupus erythematosus.Fv'" 19,5,207 It yields a positive result in up to 100% of cases of active
systemic lupus erythematosus. It is not the most specific of tests.f" 207 yielding positive
results in up to 20% of dogs with infectious diseases (particularly leishmaniasis) and up to
16% of control dogs. 195 In general, results from different laboratories cannot be compared.
It is important to record the titer (and compare it with normals for the same laboratory;
some normal dogs may have high titers) and the pattern of nuclear fluorescence. The
homogeneous, then reticulonodular patterns are the most common in canine systemic
lupus erythematosus, but titers and patterns appear to have little or no specificity in dogs
and cats.f"- 195 Other authors indicate that the speckled and homogeneous ANA patterns
are the most common in dogs with autoimmune connective tissue diseases.P"
There is no clear, constant correlation between clinical disease activity and positive
ANA titer, though there is usually a progressive decrease in titer with successful therapy.47, 195, 204, 207, 223 Any decrease in ANA titer always occurs after clinical remission. It
must be remembered that ANA can be detected from time to time with probably any
disease as well as in healthy animals.f" 195, 214 Thus, a positive ANA titer must always be
interpreted in light of other critical historical, physical, and laboratory data.
Preparations of the protozoan Crithidia luciliae have become commercially available
for assaying patient sera for antibodies against native DNA. Large surveys employing this
substrate in dogs and cats have not been reported, although preliminary reports indicate
that the assay is rarely positive in dogs with systemic lupus erythematosus and in those
with positive ANA titers.f? suggesting that dogs rarely form antibodies against native DNA.
Positive results with this test occurred in a 6-year-old female Beauceron with systemic
lupus erythematosus as well as in two of her female puppies. 198 The standard Farr test
(radioimmunoassay) for the measurement of antinative DNA antibodies in humans is
unsatisfactory in dogs, resulting in numerous false-positive results.?? Newer techniques
employing specific reagents in an ELISA format did not reveal anti-double-stranded
DNA antibodies but did detect IgG antibodies to the individual histones HI> H 2A, H 3, and
H 4' 209
About 10% of human patients with systemic lupus erythematosus are ANA-negative.l" 47 These patients have unique anticytoplasmic antibodies (anti- Ro), which are not
detected when traditional ANA test substrates (mouse or rat liver) are employed; as a
result, special substrates (calf thymus, normal human lymphocytes, human epithelial tissue
culture line) are needed for such patients. The importance of this autoantibody system in
dogs and cats is unknown. It could, however, explain the negative ANA results occasionally obtained in dogs with systemic lupus erythematosus.vv'"
In one study, sera from 131 dogs were evaluated for ANA and extractable nuclear
antigens (ENAs), including the Ro ribonuclear protein antigen. 227 The ENA was only

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 707

positive in 46% of the dogs with systemic lupus erythematosus, and none were Ropositive. ENAs were not specific for systemic lupus erythematosus, however, because
results were positive in 5% of healthy dogs and 11% of dogs with other diseases. However, the newer techniques have shown that, in the dog, antihistone antibodies are positive
in 65% and anti-ENA antibodies are detected in greater than 40% of cases. 195, 209, 227
In humans, antihistone autoantibodies have an association with drug-induced systemic
lupus erythematcsus.F'? Two anti-ENA antibodies are highly specific for canine systemic
lupus erythematosus: The anti-Sm antibodies are found in 16% of cases and anti-hnRNP
G is found in 20% of cases (this autoantibody is not usually tested for in commercially
available anti-ENA tests in human medicine).l95, 209 Another novel canine autoantibody,
anti-hnRNP I, was found in a Schnauzer with polyarthritis.F? These studies demonstrate
that dogs may manifest different autoantibodies than humans and that testing techniques
may have to be adapted for the canine (and, presumably, the cat).
Investigators have attempted to better understand lupus erythematosus in humans by
studying subsets of patients on the basis of one clinical characteristic (or set of them),
histopathologic or immunopathologic findings, or serologic studies.S 18 The use of this
subset approach may allow the clinician to gain insight into prognosis, improved therapy,
or presumed pathogenesis. Currently, three subsets of cutaneous lupus erythematosus are
recognized in humans: chronic cutaneous (discoid) lupus erythematosus, subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and acute cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Their recognition is
important because the different probability of systemic disease does correlate with which
autoantibodies are detected.v?
The suggestion that the disease previously described as idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of collies and Shetland sheepdogs should be renamed canine vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus, and that it may be similar to subacute lupus erythematosus in humans, was
based on clinical and histopathologic findings (see Chap. 12).203 Serologic studies were not
performed in the canine study but, in humans, this type of cutaneous lupus erythematosus
is highly associated with anti-Ro antibodies (70% to 90% of cases), and approximately 50%
of the patients will experience systemic lupus erythematosus, though usually not severe
and lacking renal disease.v? A study reviewing the histopathology of dogs with so-called
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers suggested that this disease
be renamed eifoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 12).212 The applicability
of such subsets to the canine and feline diseases awaits further study.
The dermatohistopathologic changes in systemic lupus erythematosus vary with the
type of gross morphologic lesions and may be nondiagnosttc.l" 22, 72, 217 The most characteristic finding is interface dermatitis (hydropic, lichenoid, or both), which may involve
hair follicle outer root sheaths (Figs. 9-20 to 9-22). Apoptosis of basal and suprabasal
cells may occur, and occasionally these apoptotic cells are associated with lymphocytic
satellitosis/" Other common findings are subepidermal vacuolar alteration (subepidermal
bubblies), focal thickening of the basement membrane zone (Fig. 9-23), and dermal
mucinosis. Uncommon findings are intrabasal to subepidermal vesicles, leukocytoclastic
vasculitis, and lupus erythematosus panniculitis (see Chap. 18). In humans, these changes
are often not present until the skin lesions are at least 6 weeks old.
Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing reveals the deposition of
immunoglobulin, complement, or both at the basement membrane zone, often known as a
positive lupus band, in 50% to 90% of patients.P- 18. 47, 55, 217 The variability in positive
results reflects differences in laboratory techniques, lesion selection (age and activity of
lesion), previous or current glucocorticoid therapy, and possibly other factors. In addition,
immunoreactants may be found at the basement membrane zone of skin in many other
conditions, including sun-damaged skin.
We saw a case of canine solar dermatitis that was positive for basement membrane
fluorescence. Though there is some controversy, positive lupus band tests from lesional
skin are not considered very diagnostic. However, in humans, positive results from nonlesional sun-protected sites correlate well with the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus. 219 In dogs, C3 is the most commonly detected immunoreactant, with IgA and IgM
being the most commonly detected immunoglobulins.56. 217

708 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-20. Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Hydropic interface dermatitis.

FIGURE 9-21. Feline systemic lupus erythematosus.
Hydropic interface dermatitis. (From Scott DW, et aI:
A glucocorticoid-repsonsive dermatitis in cats, resembling systemic lupus erythematosus in man. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 15:157, 1979.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 709

FIGURE 9-22. Feline systemic lupus erythematosus. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal
basal cells. (From Scott DW, et al: A glucocorticoid-responsive dermatitis in cats, resembling
systemic lupus erythematosus in man. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:157, 1979.)

In humans, it is often possible to distinguish between systemic lupus erythematosus
and discoid lupus erythematosus on the basis of direct immunofluorescence testing of
lesional and sun-exposed normal skin. In human patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, sun-exposed normal skin may have positive lupus bands in up to 60% of cases,

FIGURE 9-23. Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Two large, apoptotic keratinocytes in
stratum basale of epidermis can be seen in the center of the photograph. In addition, the
basement membrane zone is thickened.

710 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

whereas this rarely occurs in discoid lupus erythematosus.f 18 This criterion is of no value
in the hairy dog and cat, wherein normal skin is usually negative. 56 . 217
In humans, it is recommended that (1) biopsies not be taken from edematous lesions
(only about 47% of such lesions are positive), (2) biopsies be taken from lesions over 1
month old (only about 30% are positive if less than 1 month old), (3) skin with telangiectases not be sampled (17% of such lesions are positive, regardless of their etiology), and
(4) all glucocorticoid and immunomodulating therapy be terminated, if possible, 3 weeks
prior to biopsy.f 18.47
Because no single laboratory test is diagnostic for systemic lupus erythematosus, a
number of groups have produced sets of classification criteria for making the diagnosis.25 , 47 Although such criteria have acknowledged validity in humans, there is no such
validation of criteria for dogs and cats. The veterinarian must rely on the recognition of
multisystemic disease (especially joint, skin, kidney, oral mucosa, and hematopoietic system), positive ANA results, and confirmatory histopathologic and immunopathologic findings in involved skin and oral mucosa or both. 56 • 217 Indirect immunofluorescence testing is
negative in lupus erythematosus.
The American Rheumatism Association developed criteria for the diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus in humans, and these were modified in 1982. These have also
been applied to dogs with minor modifications, primarily those reflecting the humoral
immunologic responses of the canine (Table 9_4).196 Dogs that experience four or more
of the modified criteria during any given observation period have systemic lupus erythematosus. It has also been suggested that a probable diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus is appropriate if three criteria are present or polyarthritis with ANA is present.
Though these criteria are helpful guidelines, they must be used cautiously. In humans,
numerous situations that may lead to a false diagnosis based on the American Rheumatism

• Table 9-4

CRITERIA FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF CANINE
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS·

From Chahanne L, et al: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Part II: Diagnosis and treatment. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
21:402. 1999.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 711
Association criteria have been -described: The presence of skin disease and subsequent
diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus is particularly problematic, and other multipart
classification schemes have been proposed.s'"
Clinical Management

The prognosis in systemic lupus erythematosus is generally unpredictable and depends on
the organs involved.f" 55,196,200,217 In general, the earlier the diagnosis is made, the better
the prognosis. In the dog, it appears that patients with joint, skin, or muscle disease
respond more reliably to medication and are maintained in relatively long periods of
clinical remission. On the other hand, dogs with severe hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or both often do not respond satisfactorily to systemic glucocorticoids and require
other immunomodulating drugs, splenectomy, or both. Animals with glomerulonephritis
regularly experience progressive renal failure in spite of therapy, and this finding indicates
a poor prognosis,
Therapy of systemic lupus erythematosus must be individualized. The initial agent of
choice is probably large doses of systemic glucocorticoids (e.g., 2 to 6 mg/kg prednisone
q24h).47, 55,196,217 When systemic glucocorticoids are unsatisfactory, other immunomodulating drugs may be useful: azathioprine (Imuran) given orally at 2.2 mg/kg q24h, then q48h
(dog only), or chlorambucil (Leukeran) given orally at 0.2 mg/kg q24h, then q48h. 47 . 55, 217
Splenectomy may be needed for patients with severe hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or both. Cyclophosphamide, 2 mg/kg q24h orally, 4 days a week, may be given for
acute episodes of hemolytic anemia.P" Vincristine, 0.01 to 0.025 mg/kg intravenously, once
weekly, may be useful when thrombocytopenia is severe.!"
Levamisole (Levasole), given orally at 2.5 mglkg q48h, has occasionally been beneficial
in dogs and humans with systemic lupus erythematosus.f The combination of levamisole,
2 to 5 mg/kg (maximum dose, 150 mg) q48h, with prednisone, has been reported to give
good results in 75% of canine cases, with remissions lasting for months to years. 196, 200 The
prednisone is initially dosed at 0.5 to 1.0 mglkg twice daily, then tapered off over 1 to 2
months with long-term therapy consisting of just levamisole. Only 2 of 33 dogs treated
experienced unacceptable side effects (neutropenia, excited behavior, and aggressiveness)
from levamisole.P" 200
Chrysotherapy (injectable aurothioglucose, oral auranofin) has occasionally been used
to reduce glucocorticoid requirements in dogs but would be contraindicated in patients
with renal disease.!" 34, 47 Aspirin has occasionally been effective in the management of
cases in dogs and humans. IS, 47 Other drugs used in human patients-dapsone, antiandrogens, antimalarials, colchicine, and omega-3/omega-6 fatty acids-are of undetermined
benefit in dogs and cats, IS, 47 Plasmapheresis has been used to enhance initial response to
chemotherapy in dogs and humans with severe systemic lupus erythematosus. IS, 40 This
technique, currently used as a research tool, is hazardous and expensive.
In murine lupus erythematosus, functional elimination of the helper T cell subset
(CD4+) suppresses autoantibody formation and prevents or retards disease.F" In humans,
treatment with an anti-CD4 antibody induced a long-lasting decrease in disease activity in
patients with severe cutaneous lupus erythematosus.v"
Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus are prone to infections.P" 217 Thus, infections must be identified quickly and treated aggreSSively.
The following statements can be made about prognosis. Over 40% of the dogs with
systemic lupus erythematosus are dead within 1 year after the diagnosis is made, either as
a result of natural (renal disease, septicemia) or drug-induced causes or owing to euthanasia.47, 217 Dogs that respond well to therapy often do so with glucocorticoids alone and
often experience long-term remission on alternate-day therapy.f"- 217 Some dogs, in whom
disease was controlled well with therapy for several months, remain in prolonged drugfree rernission.f": 196,217
Several reports have indicated that people in close contact with dogs having systemic
lupus erythematosus or high-titer ANA do not have greater clinical or serologic evidence
of systemic lupus erythematosus compared with nonexposed human beings. 25,47

712 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

DISCOID LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Discoid lupus erythematosus (cutaneous lupus erythematosus) is the second most common
immune-mediated dermatitis of the dog, although it remains uncommon. It has been
described in the cat but appears to be very rare.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Canine discoid lupus erythematosus is a relatively benign cutaneous disease with no
systemic lnvolvement.P: 233, 234 A relationship or progression to canine systemic lupus
erythematosus has not been reported, nor has the disease been shown to be a good model
for the human disorder. Sun exposure aggravates the disease in about 50% of cases,
suggesting that photosensitivity plays a role in the pathogenesis. In humans, it has been
demonstrated that the lymphocytes infiltrating skin lesions of discoid and systemic lupus
erythematosus are predominantly T cells and that helper T cells predominate in discoid
lupus, whereas suppressor T cells predominate in the systemic variety," 18 In the dog,
plasma cells are prominent, a feature not shared with humans, suggesting that B lymphocytes may be important and that a different pathogenesis may be occurring.
A 9-year-old Shetland sheepdog with discoid lupus erythematosus had, on indirect
immunofluorescence testing, antibody deposition at the basement membrane zone. Western immunoblotting revealed that the 120-kd and the 85-kd proteins targeted by the
autoantibody did not correspond with the known basement membrane zone components.F" A current hypothesis concerning the pathogenesis of lesion formation is presented in the discussion of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Clinical Features

• Dog. There is probably no strong sex predilection, because both females-" and
males-" have been reported to be predisposed. No age predilection has been reported.
Collies, German shepherds, Shetland sheepdogs, Siberian huskies, Brittany spaniels, and
German shorthaired pointers demonstrate predilection. 55. 231, 234 Discoid lupus erythematosus has been reported to account for 0.3% of the canine dermatoses examined at one
university small animal practice.P"
Clinical signs of canine discoid lupus erythematosus initially include depigmentation,
erythema, and scaling of the nose (Fig. 9-24A). Early depigmentation manifests as a slate
blue or gray color change (see Fig. 9-24B). A helpful early change is the conversion of
the normally rough, cobblestone-like architecture of the nasal planum into a smooth
surface (see Fig. 9-24C and D). Later lesions commonly include erosion, ulceration, and
crusting. Initially, lesions tend to occur dorsally at the junction between the nasal planum
and haired skin or along the ventral or medial aspects of the alar folds. Typically, with
time, nasal involvement becomes more extensive and the lesions may spread up the bridge
of the nose. Less commonly, lesions may be visible periocularly, on the pinnae (see Fig.
9-24F), on the distal limbs, and on the genitals. The lips may also be involved (see Fig.
9-24E), and small punctate ulcers may be detected in the oral cavity (see Fig. 9-24G),
most commonly involving the tongue or palate (see Fig. 9-24E). Occasional dogs present
only with lesions of both pinnae or with nasodigital hyperkeratosis.P" 234, 235 Pruritus and
pain are variable. Scarring and variable degrees of permanent leukoderma are common.
Rarely, deeply ulcerated nasal lesions damage arterioles, resulting in episodic, pulsatile
hemorrhage. Affected dogs are otherwise healthy.
Discoid lupus erythematosus in dogs is commonly exacerbated or precipitated by
exposure to ultraviolet light. Thus, the disease often is more severe in the summer and in
parts of the world with sunny climates. It is very likely that many dogs previously referred
to as having nasal solar dermatitis, or "collie nose," actually had discoid lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, and pemphigus erythematosus. Squamous cell carcinomas are
reported to rarely develop in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus skin lesions (see Fig.
20-19B).236 The cause of the rare development of squamous cell carcinoma is likely
multifactorial.F" In the reported cases, the discoid lupus had been active for years and no
photoprotection had been used on the chronically inflamed, depigmented skin. 236 We have

FIGURE 9-24. A, Early erythema, alopecia, scaling, and depigmentation in a borzoi with discoid lupus
erythematosus. (From Griffin CE, et al: Canine discoid lupus erythematosus. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1:79,
1979.) B, Discoid lupus erythematosus. Note gray-blue discoloration of skin around nostrils. C, Nasal erythema,
ulceration, and depigmentation in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. D, Frontal view of nose of dog in C. E,
Depigmentation of the lip in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. (C and D, From Walton DK, et al: Canine
discoid lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:851, 1981.) F, Discoid lupus erythematosus. Patchy
alopecia, erythema, scale, and crust of pinna. G, Palatine ulcers in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. H,
Cryoglobulinemia in a cat. Necrosis of pinnal margin.

714 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

also seen squamous cell carcinoma occur in the nasal lesions of chronic dermatomyositis.
Thus, the depigmentation, ultraviolet light exposure, and chronic irritation may be more
important than the disease affecting the nasal region .
• Cat. Discoid lupus erythematosus appears to be very rare in cats. 229. 239 No age,
breed, or sex predilections are reported. Lesions are most common on the pinnae and
face. They are erythema, scaling, crusting, and alopecia. Pruritus is variable. Nasal dermatitis and depigmentation are less common (Fig. 9-25). Lesions may be more severe when
exposure to sunlight is increased. Affected cats are otherwise healthy.
Diagnosis

The most common differential diagnosis includes nasal solar dermatitis, nasal depigmentation, vitiligo-like disease, pemphigus erythematosus or pemphigus foliaceus, trauma, dermatomyositis, epitheliotropic lymphoma, drug reaction, uveodermatologic syndrome, contact dermatitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.
Definitive diagnosis of discoid lupus erythematosus is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. Immunopathology may be an aid to diagnosis but, in the dog, it
is not thought to be required for a definitive diagnosis because both false-positive and
false-negative results occur.20.233 Results of routine laboratory determinations (hemogram,
serum chemistries, urinalysis, serum protein electrophoresis) are usually unremarkable.
The ANA and LE cell tests almost always yield negative results; if positive, the ANA titer
is low. One report indicated that 9% and 4% of the dogs with discoid lupus erythematosus
were positive for anti-ENA and anti-Ro, respectively.P"
Histopathology

Skin biopsy reveals interface dermatitis (hydropic, lichenoid, or both) (Figs. 9-26 and 927).22.71,234 Focal hydropic degeneration of basal epidermal cells, pigmentary incontinence,
focal thickening of the basement membrane zone, apoptotic keratinocytes, and marked
accumulations of mononuclear cells and plasma cells around dermal vessels and appendages are important histopathologic features of discoid lupus erythematosus. Dermal mucinosis of variable degrees is also a common feature of discoid lupus erythematosus.
Immunopathologic testing reveals deposition of immunoglobulin, complement, or both
at the basement membrane zone. 56 , 231, 234 It would appear to be important to test for
individual immunoglobulin classes because IgG, IgM, or IgA may be the only demonstrable immunoglobulin. In humans, it is recommended that (1) edematous lesions not be
biopsied (only about 47% of such lesions are positive), (2) telangiectatic areas not be
biopsied (about 17% of the telangiectatic skin lesions of any dermatosis are positive), and

FIGURE 9-25. Feline discoid lupus erythematosus. Depigmentation,
erythema, and mild erosion of nasal
planum.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 71 S

FIGURE 9-26. Canine discoid lupus erythematosus. Lichenoid interface dermatitis. (From
Scott DW, et al: Linear IgA dermatoses in the dog. Cornell Vet 72:394, 1982.)

FIGURE 9-27. Canine discoid lupus erythematosus.
Lichenoid interface dermatitis with thickening of the
basement membrane zone. (From Walton DK, et al:
Canine discoid lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 17:851, 1981.)

716 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

(3) lesions less than 1 month old not be biopsied (only about 30% of such lesions are
positive). In addition, topical or systemic glucocorticoid therapy may lead to false-negative
immunopathologic findings.20 , 47. 56
We do not think that immunopathologic testing is required for the diagnosis of
discoid lupus erythematosus in most instances. Immunopathologic tests are also considered to be inferior to, and only supportive of, a diagnosis based on histopathologic
criteria. 238, 240 Indirect immunofluorescence testing has generally been negative in discoid
lupus erythematosus, though one dog having autoantibodies to the basement membrane
zone has been reported.F?
Clinical Management

The prognosis for discoid lupus erythematosus is usually good.56, 231, 234 Therapy will
probably need to be continued for life, and marked depigmentation predisposes to sunburn.
Therapy of discoid lupus erythematosus must be appropriate to the individual.f"56, 231,
233, 234 Mild cases may be controlled by, and all cases benefit from, avoidance of exposure
to intense sunlight (from 8 AM to 5 PM), the use of topical sunscreens, and the use of
topical glucocorticoids (see Chap. 3). Initially, topical glucocorticoid therapy is most successful when potent agents, such as betamethasone or fluocinolone in DMSO (Synotic),
are applied every 12 hours.
After the dermatosis is in remission, topical glucocorticoids are applied as needed
(once daily, q48h, and so forth), and less potent agents (e.g., 1% to 2% hydrocortisone)
may be sufficient for maintenance. Anecdotal reports indicate that the topical application
of 1% cyclosporine is effective.232a In some cases, a I-month course of systemic prednisone (2.2 mglkg orally q24h until remission is achieved, then q48h) is helpful. The topical
agents may then be sufficient to maintain the remission. Though not frequently effective
as the sole therapy, systemic vitamin E (400 to 800 IV daily) is recommended because it
may have a beneficial effect. 234 Vitamin E appears to have a 1- to 2-month lag phase
before its benefit is recognized clinically, and systemic glucocorticoids may be used
concurrently during this period. Vitamin E should be administered 2 hours before or after
feeding. Two of us (D.W.S., W.H.M.) have had good success in some cases with the oral
administration of products containing omega-Szomega-f fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps)
and now use these products instead of vitamin E. Various combinations of fatty
acids, vitamin E, and other treatments have been used successfully. In some cases, more
potent drugs may be given initially, then remission maintained with fatty acids and vitamin E.
If these benign treatments are not effective in dogs, tetracycline and niacinamide in
combination may be effective in up to 70% of the cases (see Chap. 3).233 In dogs under
10 kg, the dosage is 250 mg of each drug q8h, and in dogs over 10 kg, the dosage is 500
mg of each q8h. The tetracycline-niacinamide combination produces its effects within 8
weeks.
In refractory cases in dogs and cats in which the owners think that better control is
absolutely required, systemic glucocorticoids (2.2 to 4.4 mglkg prednisolone or prednisone,
given orally q24h) are often effective. For more severe or refractory cases, other systemic
drugs may be added to the treatment regimen: azathioprine (2.2 mglkg orally q24h, then
q48h in dogs only) or chlorambucil (0.2 mglkg orally q24h, then q48h). Owners should
understand that discoid lupus erythematosus is rarely a life-threatening disease but that
some of the potent immunomodulating drugs could cause severe side effects.
In humans, discoid lupus erythematosus is often responsive to antimalarial drugschloroquine (Aralen), hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), and quinacrine (Atabrme)." These
drugs may be useful in the dog as well, but dosage, efficacy, and toxicity need to be
carefully evaluated. Other drugs occasionally found to be beneficial in humans are retinoids, dapsone, and gold (oral or injectable)." The usefulness of these latter compounds
in dogs is currently unknown.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 717

Bilateral rotation flaps have been successfully used for the treatment of chronic,
medically refractory cases of canine nasal dermatitis ,2,37
VESICULAR CUTANEOUS LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS

Results of a clinicopathologic study of five Shetland sheepdogs and two collies with socalled "idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis" led the investigators to conclude that the syndrome should be renamed vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 12).203
EXFOLIATIVE CUTANEOUS LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS

Results of recent pathologic and immunopathologic studies of German shorthaired pointers with so-called "hereditary lupoid dermatosis" led the investigators to conclude that the
syndrome should be renamed exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 12).212

Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogens are proteins that precipitate from serum and plasma,
respectively, by cooling and redissolve on rewarming.I" 47, 242, 245 Cryoglobulins have been
classified into three types according to their characteristics. Type I cryoglobulins are
composed solely of monoclonal immunoglobulins or free light chains (Bence Jones proteins) and are most commonly associated with lymphoproliferative disorders, Type II
cryoglobulins are composed of monoclonal and polyclonal immunoglobulins and are most
commonly associated with autoimmune and connective tissue disease. Type III cryoglobulins are composed of polyclonal immunoglobulins and occur with infections, autoimmune
disorders, and connective tissue diseases. Essential forms also may occur where no underlying cause is identifiable. Cutaneous signs associated with cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogens are due to vascular insufficiency (obstruction, stasis, spasm, thrombosis) that occur
from microthrombi and vasculitis.
CLINICAL FEATURES

Cryoglobulinemia and cryofibrinogenemia have been rarely reported to cause skin disease
in dogs and cats.f" 243-246 When associated with autoantibodies directed against erythrocytes (cold agglutinin disease, cold hemagglutinin disease, cryopathic hemolytic anemia), it
is an autoimmune disorder associated with cold-reacting (usually IgM) erythrocyte autoantibodies, The cryopathic autoantibody is most active at colder temperatures (0° to 4°C) but
has a wide range of thermal activity (0° to 37°C). Two forms are recognized in dogs. 25 The
first is associated with cold agglutinins that are IgM antibodies. The second form is a
non agglutinating type, usually associated with IgG. The latter form is rarer and is not
known to cause skin disease. A dog with combined cryoglobulinemia (lgG, IgM) and
cryofibrinogenemia has been reported.r" Cold agglutinin disease represents a Type II
hypersensitivity reaction and has been associated with idiopathy and lead poisoning in
dogs and with upper respiratory infection, lead poisoning, and idiopathy in cats.
Clinical signs of cryoglobulinemia and cryofibrinogenemia are variable and relate to
anemia, intracapillary cold hemagglutination, or both. Skin lesions include pain, erythema,
purpura, acrocyanosis, necrosis, and ulceration. Skin lesions generally involve the extremities (paws, pinnae, nose, tip of tail) (see Figs. 9-24H and 9-28A) and are precipitated or
exacerbated by exposure to cold. Hemoglobinemia may also be present.
Tail-tip necrosis was reported in two litters of Birman kittens from the same queen.>"
Based on blood group testing of the queen and one of the toms, a presumptive diagnosis
of neonatal isoerythrolysis involving cold agglutinins was made. The tip of the tail became
necrotic within the first week of life. It was thought that the pinnae, paws, and nose of
the neonates were protected from cold by close contact with the queen. The kittens
survived pending the severity of any intravascular hemolysis,

718 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-28. Cryoglobulinemia
in a dog. A, Marked sloughing of skin
and claws, with exposure of phalanges on front paws. B, Biopsy of
pinna. Diffuse edema, extravasation
of erythrocytes, thrombosed vessels,
and homogenization of dermal collagen.

DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and frostbite.
Definitive diagnosis of cold agglutinin disease is made by history, physical examination, and demonstration of significant titers of cold agglutinins. In vitro autohemagglutination of blood at room temperature can be diagnostic for cold-reacting autoantibodies.
Blood in heparin or ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA) is allowed to coolon a slide,
thus permitting the autoagglutination to be readily visible macroscopically. The reaction
can be accentuated by cooling the blood to O°C or reversed by warming the blood to
37°C. Doubtful cases can be confirmed via Coombs' test if the complete test is performed
at 4°C and the Coombs reagent has activity against IgM. Caution in interpretation of the
cold Coombs' test is warranted, because normal dogs and cats may have titers up to 1:
100.47.247

Cryoprecipitate levels may be crudely determined by allowing venous blood collected
in a warm syringe to clot at 37°C for 30 minutes, then the serum and citrated plasma are
cooled to 4°C and a gel-like precipitate is formed that will redissolve upon rewarming to
37°C.245 The precipitate is removed, and the serum and plasma globulin and fibrinogen
levels with and without the precipitate may be compared to give a level of cryoglobulin
and cryofibrinogen. In 10 normal dogs, the mean levels were 0.106 gL -I for cryoglobulin

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 719

and 0.16 gL -1 for cryofibrinogen, whereas an affected dog had levels of 0.669 gL -1 and
0.3 gL -1, respectively.P"

HISTOPATHOLOGY
Skin biopsy usually reveals necrosis, ulceration, and often secondary suppurative changes.
Fortuitously sampled sections may show vasculitis, thrombotic to necrotic blood vessels, or
blood vessels containing an amorphous eosinophilic substance consisting largely of precipitated cryoglobulin.!" 242, 245 Diffuse edema, extravasation of erythrocytes, and homogenization of dermal collagen also occur (see Fig. 9-28B).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for cryoglobulinemia and cryofibrinogenemia varies with the underlying
cause. Therapy includes (1) correction of the underlying cause, if possible, (2) avoidance
of cold, and (3) immunosuppressive drug regimens (e.g., glucocorticoids, azathioprine)
(see Chap. 3).

Graft-Versus-Host Disease
Graft-versus-host disease is a well-recognized result of bone marrow transplantation in
dogs and humans.v lB, 47, 249, 251 The disease occurs whenever lymphoid cells from an
immunocompetent donor are introduced into a histoincompatible recipient that is incapable of rejecting them. The disease results from donor T cell responses to recipient
transplantation antigens.
In dogs and humans, a bone marrow graft from a donor genetically identical for
major histocompatibility (MHC) antigens is followed by significant graft-versus-host disease in about 50% of recipients, despite post-graft immunosuppressive therapy. Hence,
minor histocompatibility antigens are important in the development of disease. The principal target organs are the skin, liver, and intestinal tract. In dogs, acute graft-versus-host
disease develops about 2 weeks after grafting and is characterized by erythroderma,
jaundice, diarrhea, and gram-negative infections. Chronic graft-versus-host disease develops about 3 to 4 months after grafting and is characterized by exfoliative erythroderma,
ulcerative dermatitis, ascites, and gram-positive infections.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. Histopathologic
findings in acute graft-versus-host disease include varying degrees of dermal lymphoid
infiltrates, interface dermatitis (hydropic or lichenoid) with apoptosis and satellitosis. The
lymphocytic exocytosis and apoptosis also target the follicular epithelium.I" 47, 24B, 250 These
changes have been compared to and are similar to those occurring in erythema multiforme." In chronic graft-versus-host disease, one finds variable sclerodermoid or poikilodermatous changes.
The immunohistochemistry of acute canine graft-versus-host disease has been studied
in six dogs and is similar to that described in humans.v 249 Epidermal and follicular
keratinocytes of affected skin upregulate ICAM-l, CD44, and MHC II, similar to what is
found in erythema multiforme.f However, the overall lymphocytic infiltrate in these two
diseases is different. Although both diseases have CD3+, CD8a,8+ and TCR-a,8+ T
cells, graft-versus-host disease had fewer dermal CD4+ T cells, CDI + and CDn +
dendritic cells, and no CD21 + B cells (which occurred in erythema multiforme). These
findings suggested that the mechanism of disease is similar in the two diseases, though
erythema multiforme has additional pathologic pathways." Whether this relates to the
stage of disease is unknown because the dogs with erythema multiforme may have had
more chronic disease than the dogs with experimentally induced graft-versus-host disease.
Epidermal and follicular ICAM-l expression may playa key role in tethering CD8+
T cells, enabling subsequent interactions between T cells and keratinocytes.v 249 Activated
T cells produce a storm of cytokines, including IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, interferon (IFN)-a, and
TNF -a. These mediators recruit and activate effector cells, including additional lympho-

720 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
cytes, macrophages, and natural killer cells that attack both host and donor tissue through
contact-dependent mechanisms (such as perform) or soluble mediators (such as
TNF-a).
Therapy of graft-versus-host disease with various combinations of systemic glucocorticoids, azathioprine, cyclosporine, methotrexate, and antithymocyte serum have been only
partially and unpredictably effective. 249. 251 A combination of mycophenolate mofetil and
cyclosporine demonstrated synergism, but beneficial effects were still Iimited.P' Leflunomide, when combined with prednisone and cyclosporine, has been reported to virtually
eliminate allograft rejection responses."

Cutaneous Adverse Drug Reaction
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions (drug eruption, drug allergy, dermatitis medicamentosa)
in dogs and cats are uncommon, variably pruritic, and pleomorphic cutaneous or mucocutaneous reactions to a drug. 253, 257, 269, 270, 286, 287

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Adverse reactions to drugs are common and, in humans, cutaneous reactions are one of
the most common.!" Drugs responsible for skin eruptions may be administered orally,
topically, or by injection or inhalation. The incidence of cutaneous adverse drug reactions
in dogs and cats was reported to be 2% and 1.6%, respectively, of all the canine and
feline dermatology cases examined at one university practice,286, 287 In humans, the incidence is reported to be 2,2% of all hospitalized patients and 3 per 1000 courses of drug
therapy." Even these numbers are suspect because few mechanisms can accurately record
the incidence of drug reactions.P?
Adverse drug reactions may be divided into two major groups: (1) predictable, which
are usually dose-dependent and are related to the pharmacologic actions of the drugs, and
(2) unpredictable or idiosyncratic, which are often dose-independent and are related to
the individual's immunologic response or to genetic differences in the susceptibility of
patients (idiosyncracy or intolerance), which are often related to metabolic or enzymatic
deficiencies. Drug metabolites are generated by cytochrome P-450-mixed function oxidases (phase I enzymes) but also by other oxidative metabolizing enzymes, some of which
are present in skin,295 Reactive drug metabolites then need to be detoxified by phase II
enzymes, such as epoxide hydrolase or glutathione-S-transferase, to prevent toxicity,
Thus, two places allow for inappropriate generation and/or accumulation of toxic
reactants more toxic than the parent compounds, In humans, slow acetylation contributes
to sulfonamide drug reactions and familial anticonvulsant drug reactions are linked to
inherited detoxification defects,295 A hypothesis for the drug reactions associated with
sulfonamides and anticonvulsants includes (1) oxidation by cytochrome P-450 into chemically reactive metabolites (either in liver by hepatic cytochrome P-450 with secondary
transfer to skin or in keratinocytes by epidermal cytochrome P-450), and (2) decreased
detoxification of these reactive metabolites, which bind to proteins and induce an immunologic response,
Many cutaneous effects of certain drugs are predictable, For instance, many of the
anticancer or immunosuppressive drugs can cause alopecia, purpura, poor wound healing,
and increased susceptibility to infection through their effects on cellular biology.18, 47, 254,
256, 277 Doxorubicin typically causes alopecia that begins on the head and extends to the
ventral neck, thorax, and abdomen.P" 274. 276 Hyperpigmentation and pruritus may also
occur, Immunologic reactions involved in cutaneous drug reactions include Types I, II,
III, and IV hypersensitivity reactions. Newer techniques may help to determine the
underlying immune response in some types of drug reactions.F" Additionally, other immunologic reactions may occur as evidenced by the drug-induced development of erythema
multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of
miniature Schnauzers. Though the mechanism for these reactions is unknown, it is
thought that immunologic mechanisms may play a role. Human patients with systemic

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 721

lupus erythematosus and atopy are thought to be predisposed to cutaneous drug reactions.!" but no such observations have been made for the dog and cat.
Any drug may cause an eruption (Tables 9-5 and 9-6), though certain drugs are
more frequently associated with cutaneous adverse drug reactions. The most common
drugs recognized to produce idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in dogs are
topical agents, sulfonamides (especially those that are trimethoprim-potentiated, such as
Tribrissen), penicillins, cephalosporins, levamisole, and diethylcarbamazine.F" In cats, the
most common causes are topical agents, penicillins, cephalosporins, and sulfonamides.P"

CLINICAL FEATURES
Cutaneous adverse drug reactions can mimic virtually any dermatosis (see Tables 9-5 and
9-6; Fig. 9-29A to H)." In humans, the most common morphologic patterns are exanthematous, urticaria or angioedema, and fixed drug eruption.P? In dogs, the most common
reactions were contact dermatitis, exfoliative dermatitis, pruritus with self-induced lesions,
maculopapular eruptions, and erythema multiforme.F" In cats, the most common reactions
were contact dermatitis and pruritus with self-induced lesions.F" No age or sex predilections have been reported for canine and feline cutaneous drug reactions.P"- 287 In general,
no breed predilections are evident, though Poodles, Bichon Frises, Yorkshire terriers, silky
terriers, Pekingese, and Maltese terriers ("fuzzy" hair coats) are predisposed to local
injection reactions (especially with rabies vacciner.F" 287 Doberman pinschers to sulfonamide reactions,26o.287 and miniature Schnauzers to sulfonamide, gold, and shampoo (superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis) reactions.F": 294
In one study of cutaneous adverse drug reactions in dogs,287 the following breeds
were found to be at increased risk: Shetland sheepdog, Dalmatian, Yorkshire terrier,
miniature Poodle, miniature Schnauzer, Australian shepherd, Old English sheepdog, Scottish terrier, wirehaired Fox terrier, and Greyhound. Although humans with HIV infections
are at increased risk for drug reactions, cats with cutaneous adverse drug reactions were
not FlY-positive or FeLV-positive. 286
Although no specific type of reaction is related to only one drug, certain reactions are
more common with certain drugs. The syndrome of superficial suppurative necrolytic
dermatitis of miniature Schnauzers has been associated only with shampoos (see Fig. 929H).287, 294 Adult miniature Schnauzers of either sex show cutaneous and systemic signs
within 48 to 72 hours after shampooing (usually insecticidal). Lesions, which may be
widespread or primarily ventral, include erythematous papules and plaques that develop
pustulosis, becoming painful, necrotic, and ulcerative. Lesions regress spontaneously
within 1 to 2 weeks with symptomatic therapy. Systemic signs include pyrexia, depression,
and neutrophilia.
Drug eruptions associated with systemic signs and a fatal outcome were reported in
two dogs after carprofen (Rimadyl) therapy.P" Skin lesions included small pustules, erythematous macules, crusts, and erosions that histologically had dermal neutrophilic infiltrates. Both dogs died in spite of immunosuppressive therapy. Both had neutrophilic
infiltrates of the respiratory tract. It was proposed that these two cases had a carprofeninduced condition similar to Sweet's syndrome in humans.
Erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis have been most common with
administration of sulfonamides, cephalosporins, and levamisole (see Fig. 9-29E to C).t
Three dogs, two treated with trimethoprim/sulfonamide, experienced superficial pemphigus that had features of erythema multiforme, including keratinocyte apoptosis and neutrophilic satellitosis.'! A drug eruption in a dog with coccidioidomycosis treated with
itraconazole had clinical and histologic changes compatible with erythema multiforme.F"
Diethylcarbamazine and 5-fluorocytosine have been associated with fixed drug eruptions, especially on the scrotum of male dogs (Fig. 9-30A).47. 271. 281 A hypersensitivity

'See references 47, 52, 265, 269, 273, 279, 282, 284-287,
[See references 49, 52, 56, 253, 269, 273, 287, 291, 323

722 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
• Tahle 9-5

CUTANEOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS IN
DOGS40, 171, 307

REACTION PATTERN

FREQUENCY*

Urticaria-angioedema

R

Maculopapular (morbilliform)

U

Erythroderma/exfoliative dermatitis

C

Autoimmune-like
Pemphigus foliaceus

R

Pemphigus vulgaris
Bullous pemphigoid
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Erythema multiforme

U

Toxic epidermal necrolysis

R

Pruritus and self-induced lesions
(allergy-like)

U

Injection site reactions
Panniculitis
Vasculitis
Atrophy
Contact dermatitis/otitis extema
Vasculitis
Local

U

C
U

Multifocal

Fixed eruption

Granulomatous mural folliculitis
Lichenoid
Miscellaneous
Mucocutaneous dermatitis
Pressure point ulceration and
onychomadesis
Alopecia and increased susceptibility to infection
Flushing and pruritus

R

R
VR

DRUGS
Penicillin, ampicillin, cephalosporins, sulfonamides, tetracycline, ivermectin, moxidectin, levamisole, barbiturates, etoposide, neostigmine,
xylazine, phenamidine, cyclosporine, amitraz,
polyhydroxidine, vaccines, bacterins, antisera,
blood transfusions, radiographic contrast media,
allergen extracts, vitamin K, hypoallergenic
shampoo
Penicillins, sulfonamides, amoxicillin clavulanate,
griseofulvin, 5-fluorocytosine, diethylcarbamazine, hydroxyzine, procainamide, cimetidine,
various shampoos, amitraz
Various topical agents, sulfonamides, quinidine,
levamisole, lincomycin, itraconazole, hydroxyzine, chlorpheniramine, acepromazine
Sulfonamides, ampicillin, penicillin, cephalosporins, diethylcarbamazine
Procainamide, thiabendazole, phenytoin
Triamcinolone
Sulfonamides, hydralazine, primidone, vaccine
Sulfonamides, amoxicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate,
cephalexin, chloramphenicol, enrofloxacin,
erythromycin, gentamicin, lincomycin, tetracycline, aurothioglucose, diethylcarbamazine, ivermectin, levamisole, L-thyroxine, phenobarbital,
chlorpyrifos, D-limonene, otic drops, itraconazole
Sulfonamides, ampicillin, penicillin, cephalexin,
griseofulvin, levamisole, 5-fluorocytosine, D-limonene, aurothioglucose
Sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, griseofulvin, acepromazine, primidone, levamisole, diethylcarbamazine, gentamicin, thyroid extracts, lincomycin, astemizole, phenobarbital, cephalexin,
various topicals
Rabies vaccine, others
Rabies vaccine, others
Glucocorticoids
Numerous topicals (dermatologic and otic)
Injectables (especially rabies vaccine)
Sulfonamides, ampicillin, erythromycin, penicillin,
chloramphenicol, amoxicillin, enrofloxacin, gentamicin, ivermectin, metronidazole, phenobarbital, furosemide, itraconazole, loperamide (Irnodium), metoclopramide, vaccines, enalapril,
phenylbutazone
Diethylcarbamazine, ampicillin, amoxicillin clavulanate, cephalexin, 5-fluorocytosine, aurothioglucose, thiacetarsamide, L-thyroxine
Cefadroxyl, amitraz, shampoos, L-thyroxine
Drug combination
Retinoids
Bleomycin
Glucocorticoids, numerous immunosuppressive
agents
Doxorubicin

Table continued on opposite page

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 723
• Table 9-5

CUTANEOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS IN
DOGS40. 271, 307 Continued

REACTION PATTERN

FREQUENCY*

Hirsutism, papillomatosis, lymphoplasmacytoid dermatitis
Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma-like
Eosinophilic pustulosis
Subcomeal to follicular neutrophilic pustulosis
Urticarial eosinophilic dermatitis
Sterile abscess
Scabies-like
Follicular necrosis and atrophy

DRUGS

Cyclosporine
Shampoos
Ketoconazole, drug combination
Ampicillin
Sulfonamides, carprofen
Diethylcarbamazine
Sulfonamides
Amoxicillin-clavulanate

Sulfonamides, levamisole

'C = common; R = rare; U = uncommon; VR = very rare.

reaction (probably Type III) associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (Tribrissen) administration (probably sulfadiazine-related) has been recognized in Doberman pinschers (genetically programmed?).260 Though idiosyncratic reactions to sulfonamides are considered
relatively common, cutaneous manifestations occurred in only 9% of affected dogs in one
study.259 Interestingly, neither of these two dogs was a Doberman pinscher.
Cyclosporine has been reported to cause lymphoplasmacytoid dermatitis with malignant features (usually a solitary plaque or nodule) in dogs and humans. 262, 283 Methimazole may produce severe pruritus and excoriations of the face and neck of cats that are

• Table 9-6

CUTANEOUS ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS IN
CATS40, 170

REACTION PATTERN

FREQUENCY*

Urticaria-angioedema
Maculopapular (morbilliform)

VR

Erythroderma/exfoliative dermatitis
Autoimmune-like
Pemphigus foliaceus
Erythema multiforme

U

Toxic epidermal necrolysis

R

Pruritus and self-induced lesions
(allergy-like)
Injection site reactions
Panniculitis
Vasculitis
Atrophy
Contact dermatitis/otitis extema
Vasculitis
Local

U

R

R
R

Tetracycline, penicillin, ampicillin, vaccines
Cephalexin, sulfonamides, penicillin, ampicillin,
griseofulvin
Various topicals, penicillin
Ampicillin, cimetidine, doxycycline, cephalexin,
sulfonamides
Cephalexin, penicillin, aurothioglucose, amoxicillin, sulfonamides, griseofulvin, propylthiouracil
Cephaloridine, hetacillin, ampicillin, griseofulvin,
penicillin, aurothioglucose, cephalexin, FeLV
antiserum
Methimazole, amoxicillin clavulanate, propylthiouracil, ampicillin, hetacillin, gentamicin

U

C

Vaccines, glucocorticoids
Vaccines, ivermectin, antibiotics
Glucocorticoids, progestationals
Numerous topicals (dermatologic and otic)

R

Multifocal

Fixed eruption
Lichenoid
Miscellaneous
Pinnal erythema
Generalized atrophy and fragility

DRUGS

VR

VR

"C = common; R = rare; U = uncommon; VR = very rare.

Injectables
Penicillin, fenbendazole
Clemastine, enrofloxacin
Drug combination
Ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin
Glucocorticoids, progestationals, phenytoin

724 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-29. Legend on opposite page

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 725

only partially responsive to glucocorticoid treatment and mimic food hypersensitivity.P"
Drugs have also been reported to produce reactions that clinically, pathologically,
and immunologically resemble pemphigus (see Figs. 9-29C and 9-30B) and pemphigOid. 252. 268. 272, 273. 275 Drug reactions (associated with ketoconazole in one case, multiple
drugs in others) have occurred in dogs that were clinically and histologically indistinguishable from epitheliotropic lymphoma, as has been reported with various drugs in humans. 261. 280, 287 Lesions resolved spontaneously when the drugs were stopped. Chronic
eosinophilic urticaria was associated with diethylcarbamazine.P"
Unusual reactions to local injections are also well recognized (Fig. 9-31). One such
reaction is the focal vasculitis and alopecia that follows the subcutaneous administration of
rabies vaccine, especially in Poodles and Yorkshire and silky terriers (see discussion of
vasculitisl.t?? Another local reaction is the panniculitis associated with the subcutaneous
administration of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs,264 combined rhinotracheitis-calicivirus
vaccine in cats,289 and other products (see discussion of panniculitis in Chap. 18).286,287
Plaquelike lesions with a distinctive interstitial granulomatous dermatitis histopathologic appearance have been associated with drug therapy in humans.P" One of us
(D.W.S.) has seen one such reaction in a dog being treated with amoxicillin clavulanate
(Fig. 9-32).
Granulomatous mural folliculitis is a rare cutaneous reaction pattern apparently associated with drug administration (amitraz, cefadroxyl, topicals, L-thyroxine).288 Lesions consist
of large areas of well-circumscribed, coalescent alopecia; scaling; and hyperkeratosis (Fig.
9-33A and B). Foci of papules, plaques, erosions, and crusts may occur. Chronic lesions
often have a smooth, shiny, cicatricial appearance.
Because drug reaction can mimic so many different dermatoses, an accurate knowledge of the medications given to any patient with an obscure form of dermatosis is
imperative. Drug eruption may occur after a drug has been given for days or years or a
few days after drug therapy is stopped. Eruptions most commonly occur within 1 to 3
weeks after initiating therapy. 286. 287 Some reactions (vasculitis, atrophic dermatosis, nodules, rabies vaccine reactions) may occur weeks to months after the drug is administered. 269. 270 At present, the only reliable test for the diagnosis of drug eruption is to
withdraw the drug and watch for disappearance of the eruption (usually in 1 to 2 weeks).
Occasionally, however, drug eruptions persist for weeks to months after the offending
drug is stopped (e.g., reactions to vaccines and other injectables; lichenoid reactionsl.P"'
270, 286. 287 Purposeful readministration of the offending drug to determine whether the
eruption will be reproduced is undesirable and may be dangerous.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis is complex because cutaneous adverse drug reaction may mimic
virtually any dermatosis. In general, no specific or characteristic laboratory findings indicate drug eruption. Results of in vivo and in vitro immunologic tests have usually been
disappointing. The basophil degranulation test has been reported to be a valuable test for
detecting some hypersensitivity-induced cutaneous adverse drug reactions'? but is technically demanding and generally unavailable.
Helpful criteria for determining whether a drug eruption is likely are as follows286.287:
1. Hypersensitivity or reactions occur in a minority of patients receiving the drug.

FIGURE 9-29. Drug reaction, A, Mucocutaneous depigmentation and ulcers due to triple sulfa. B, Pinnal erythema,
crusting, and alopecia due to Tresaderrn. C, Exfoliative erythroderma due to Tribrissen. D, Vasculitic purpura due to
chloramphenicol. E, Ulcerative stomatitis and cheilitis associated with erythema multiforrne major in a dog with Klebsiella
otitis extema who had received numerous topical and systemic medicaments, F, Same dog as in E. Note ulcers on footpads,
G, Multifocal ulcers on the ventral thorax and abdomen of a cat with erythema multiforme major due to cephalexin.
(Courtesy E. Cuaguere.) H, Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis in a miniature Schnauzer follOwing administration
of an antiseborrheic shampoo,

726 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-30. Cutaneous adverse
drug reactions. A, Fixed drug eruption on scrotum of a dog associated
with diethylcarbamazine. Well-circumscribed ulceration and depigmentation. B, Pemphigus foliaceus on the
footpads of a cat in association with
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine.

FIGURE 9-31. Local area of necrosis in the flank of a dog following
administration of leptospirosis bacterin.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 727

FIGURE 9-32. Granulomatous
interstitial dermatitis in a dog associated with amoxicillin-clavulanate. Infiltrate of macrophages and lymphocytes around degenerate collagen
fibers.

FIGURE 9-33. Granulomatous
mural folliculitis in a dog associated
with L-thyroxine. A, Well-circumscribed alopecia, scaling, and mild hyperpigmentation over the dorsolateral
thorax. B, Similar lesions, including
hyperkeratotic plaques, over the dorsal lumbosacral area.

728 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

2. Observed manifestations do not resemble known pharmacologic actions for the
drugs.
3. Previous experience that the suspected drug is known for causing this type of
cutaneous reaction.
4. Lack of alternative causes that could explain the cutaneous reaction that occurred
with the suspect drug.
5. Appropriate timing-generally, cutaneous adverse drug reactions occur within the
first 1 to 3 weeks of the initiation of therapy with the offending drug and while the
drug is still being taken or is still present in the body. Prior exposure to the drug
may have been tolerated without adverse effects and, if the reaction is a hypersensitivity reaction, prior exposure should have occurred so that sensitization could
occur. If an animal has been previously sensitized, cutaneous reactions may be
seen within hours to days of drug readministration.
6. Dechallenge. Resolution begins to occur within 1 to 2 weeks after the drug is
discontinued. For some reactions-such as fixed drug, lichenoid, and local injection reaction - resolution may require several weeks.
7. Rechallenge. Reaction is reproduced by administration of small doses of the drugs
or of cross-reacting drugs. Though this is the most definitive way to document the
drug reaction, it is generally not recommended because more serious reactions may
occur. In one study, 29% of cases of cutaneous adverse drug reaction in dogs were
confirmed, often accidentally, by rechallenge. 287
Identifying the specific cause of a cutaneous drug eruption can be difficult because
many patients are receiving several drugs at the same time.I" 252, 286, 287 In some cases, the
reactions only occur with drug combinations and one drug will be tolerated.
Recently, possible causal drug exposure has been assessed by adaptation of drug
implication criteria adopted by the French committee for pharmacologic surveillance in
humans (Table 9_7).278, .308
Just as the clinical morphology of drug reactions varies greatly, so do the histologic
findings. Histologic patterns recognized with cutaneous adverse drug reactions include

• Tahl(· 9-7

PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR THE IMPLICATION OF
DRUGS AS CAUSES OF CUTANEOUS
ERUPTIONS261,291

Delay in Appearance of Lesions as Related to Drug Administration
Drug attributed a score of:
a, + 1 (suggestive) if lesions began over 7 days after the first administration of the drug or less than 1 day after
reexposure to a culprit medication.
b. 0 (inconclusive) if a specific assessment could not be made.
c. -1 (not suggestive) where criteria for "suggestive" (+ 1) not met.
Effea of Drug Interruption on Cutaneous Lesions
Dmg attributed a score of:
a. + 1 (suggestive) if lesions resolve solely with removal of suspect drug.
b. 0 (inconclusive).
c. -1 (incompatible) if patient does not improve upon drug elimination or if improvement occurs without
removal of suspect drug.
Drug Rechallenge
Drug attributed a score of:
a. + 1 (suggestive) if lesions recur with readministration of the suspect drug.
b. 0 (inconclusive) if no rechallenge perfonned.
c. -1 (incompatible) if rechallenge does not reproduce the lesions.
A positive total drug score (e.g" + 1, + 2, + 3) is considered suggestive of drug causation.
A zero score is considered inconclusive.
A negative score (e.g., -1, -2, -3) is considered doubtful.
Drugs are given a numerical score of - 3 to + 3 based on the added values obtained from the three criteria.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 729

perivascular dermatitis (pure, spongiotic, hyperplastic), interface dermatitis (hydropic, lichenoid), vasculitis/vasculopathy (Fig. 9-34), intraepidermal vesiculopustular dermatitis (Fig.
9-35), subepidermal vesicular dermatitis, interstitial dermatitis, and panniculitis. Eosinophils may be absent or numerous.P" 270 In humans, eosinophils may be more prominent
with drug-induced than with non-drug-induced pemphigus foliaceus.P? Some syndromes-such as erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis-have their own characteristic histopathology. Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of miniature Schnauzers is characterized by parakeratosis,
superficial epidermal suppuration and necrosis, epidermal edema, and suppurative perivascular and perifollicular dermatitis (Fig. 9_36).294 Similar changes may occur in the follicular epithelium. Granulomatous mural folliculitis is characterized by infiltration and
eventual replacement of follicular epithelium, and occasionally sebaceous glands, by granulomatous inflammation (Fig. 9_37).288
Direct immunofluorescence and immunohistochemical testing in drug reactions may
reveal immunoreactants deposited in a variety of nondiagnostic patterns, especially in the
walls of blood vessels and at the basement membrane zone. 269. 270, 286, 287

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for drug reaction is usually good unless other organ systems are involved or
there is extensive epidermal necrosis. Therapy of drug reaction consists of (1) discontinuing the offending drug, (2) treating symptoms with topical and systemic medications as
indicated, and (3) avoiding chemically related drugs. 286, 287 Drug reactions may be poorly
responsive to glucocorticoids, though some immunologically mediated reactions respond to
glucocorticoids, pentoxifylline, or immunosuppressive regimens (see Chap. 3).252,270

Erythema Multiforme
Erythema multiforme is an uncommon, acute, usually self-limited eruption of the skin,
mucous membranes, or both characterized by distinctive gross lesions and a diagnostic
sequence of pathologic changes.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Despite recognition of multiple etiologic and triggering causes, the pathogenesis of erythema multiforme is not fully understood. It is currently thought to represent a hostspecific cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction directed toward various antigens, including

FIGURE 9-34. Vasculitis associated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in a dog, Note necrosis of
vessel walls, thrombosis, and karyorrhectic neutrophils.

730 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-35. Sterile neutrophilic/eosinophilic pustulosis in a dog
associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine. A, Intraepidermal pustules
and dense interstitial dermatitis. B,
Close-up of A. Pustules contain neutrophils and eosinophils.

FIGURE 9-36. Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of
miniature Schnauzers. Superficial
suppuration and necrosis affecting
the epidermis and hair follicle infundibulum.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 731

FIGURE 9-37. Granulomatous mural
folliculitis in a dog associated with Lthyroxine. A, Hair follicles have been replaced by granulomatous infiltrate (arrow). B, Macrophages, often containing
melanin, within follicular epithelium.
Follicular keratin is excessive and orthoto-parakeratotic (left). C, Hair follicle
replaced by granulomatous infiltrate, including multinucleated histiocytic giant
cells (arrow).

infections, drugs, foods, neoplasia, and connective tissue diseases." 18. 56. 291. 323 Recent
studies indicated that the immunohistochemical findings in skin lesions from dogs with
erythema multiforme and acute graft-versus-host disease were similar." Epidermal and
follicular keratinocytes markedly expressed ICAM-l, MHC II and, to a lesser extent,
CDla. The expression of these molecules is likely to tether leukocytes and keep them in
the epithelium. The simultaneous expression of MHC II and CDla provides altered
keratinocytes with the capability of antigen presentation. Keratinocytes in adjacent, noninflamed epidermis also expressed ICAM-l and MHC II, suggesting that the upregulation
of both adhesion molecules may represent an early phase in the development of erythema
multiforme. CD44 was markedly upregulated in keratinocytes and infiltrating cells, and it
is involved in T lymphocyte activation and site-specific extravasation of lymphocytes into
tissues. Intraepithelial infiltrating cells were mainly CD3+, CD8-al3+, TCR-al3+ T lymphocytes, with smaller numbers of CD4+ T lymphocytes. CDI +, CDllc+ Langerhans'
cells were increased in number. The majority of dermal infiltrating cells were also CD3+,
CD8-al3+, TCR-al3+ T lymphocytes. CDI +, CDllc+ dermal dendrocytes were increased in number.
The phenotypic changes in keratinocytes in canine erythema multiforme indicate that
alteration of the keratinocyte (e.g., by drugs, infectious agents) might be a primary factor
in disease pathogenesis.s The up regulation of ICAM-l and MHC II, perhaps through the
production of IFN-a and TNF-13 by CD8+ (cytotoxic) and CD4+ (helper) T lympho-

732 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
cytes, allows the tethering and keeping of lymphocytes in epithelium. Keratinocyte apoptosis is probably produced by signals from intraepithelial CD8+ T lymphocytes.
Studies in humans with erythema multiforme have shown that various basement
membrane zone molecules-integrins a6 and {34, laminins I and 5, collagens IV and
VII-are disrupted and fragrnented.P'" A subset of humans with erythema multiforme
have autoantibodies against desmoplakin I and II as well as suprabasilar acantholysis in
skin biopsy specimens.s?'
The confusion with the pathogenesis and classification of erythema multiforme has
been frustrating for human and veterinary medicine for years. 298. 306-308 In humans, erythema multiforme is usually divided into two subsets.P'': 306 An important distinction, in
humans, is that the more common, mild, relapsing cutaneous disease of erythema multiforme (erythema multiforme "minor") is most often associated with viral infections,
whereas the more severe forms involving mucosa and having more widespread cutaneous
disease (erythema multiforme "major") are most often associated with drug eruptions.P"
In addition, much confusion has existed over the relationship of erythema multiforme
to the Stevens-Johnson syndrome (also called erythema multiforme major by some authors), toxic epidermal necrolysis (Lyell's syndrome), and "overlaps" of the latter two
entities. Relying on some etiologic, clinical, and histopathologic similarities, it had been
suggested that these conditions simply represent different aspects of a single spectrum of
diseases.P" 306. 315, 319, 320 However, this unitary concept has been disputed on clinical and
histologic grounds. 297, 306, 315. 319, 320 Using standard histopathologic and immunohistochemical techniques, it was shown that the inflammatory infiltrates in the skin of humans with
erythema multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis differed both in density and nature. 315. 321 In erythema multiforme, the cellular infiltrate was of high density (cell-rich)
and rich in T lymphocytes, whereas in toxic epidermal necrolysis, the infiltrate was of low
density (cell-poor) and dominated by macrophages and dermal dendrocytes.P"
Support for a different pathomechanism has been shown in dogs as well.50, 308 In a
study of apoptosis in canine skin disease, investigators found that keratinocyte apoptosis
was a feature of erythema multiforme but not of toxic epidermal necrolysis/" This at least
suggests that these two diseases are not the same. However, before conclusions can be
reached, more cases and some that share the histopathology of both disorders need to be
studied.
Much of the confusion in classification has stemmed from the terminology that is
applied to the various syndromes in humans and the lack of agreement on a clinical
definition ,47, 306. 308 Hence, various authors consider the Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
erythema multiforme major to be different or the same, and they divide erythema multiforme into "minor" and "major" variants or not. 297, 298 For this reason, some authors have
proposed that the term erythema multiforme be used to describe all forms of the entity
and that the Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis be called
Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis, eliminating the terms major and
minor.306, 319 In veterinary medicine, this confusion has been compounded by the common
acceptance of a diagnosis based primarily on histopathologic findings. 22, 72, 308
The clinical separation of these different diseases is becoming more realistic in human
medicine. The first point of separation is on presentation because most cases of erythema
multiforme are relatively mild; have an acute onset of lesions, including classic target
lesions; have no fever or prodromal symptoms; and, if there is mucosal involvement, it is
usually mild and limited to the oral cavity.306 These cases are self-limited, and lesions clear
within I to 3 weeks.
The confusion has occurred in cases that are more widespread and may involve fever
or prodromal symptoms. Recently, after the publication of a study in human patients
requiring hospitalization for severe disease with lesions compatible with erythema multiforme or Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis, a clinical classification
was proposed and reviewed and a consensus on a clinical separation was reached.F"
However, these authors wrote of their classification that its "validity is unproven." Four
types of lesions were found in these cases: typical target lesions, raised atypical target
lesions, flat atypical target lesions, and macules with or without blisters. Two main features
were used to separate these cases: the presence of typical target lesions and extent or

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 733

body surface area of epidermal detachment.s" Cases were classified into one of five
categories, and the salient differentiating feature between what is erythema multiforme
and the rest of Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis cases was the presence of the typical target lesion in all cases of erythema multiforme. Additionally, all
erythema multiforme cases involved less than 10% body surface area epidermal detachment.
When this classification scheme was used, a significant correlation between clinical
findings, cause, and histology was found between erythema multiforme and StevensJohnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis. Erythema multiforme was primarily associated with infections, particularly herpesvirus, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis was primarily associated with drug administration.297, 298 Erythema
multiforme lesions may also occur with lupus erythematosus in Rowell's syndrome.'?"
Histopathologic findings in the erythema multiforme cases revealed a predominantly inflammatory mononuclear lichenoid infiltrate, and Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis revealed predominantly epidermal necrosis with minimal inflammation.297, 301, 321
The human international consensus clinical classification has been adapted for use in
dogs by a multicenter group (Canada, Europe, United States) (Table 9_8).308 Possible
causal drug exposure was addressed by adopting the drug implication criteria used in
humans (see Table 9_7).278 In this scheme, erythema multiforme cases have flat or raised
target or polycyclic lesions, less than 50% of the body surface affected with an erythematous or purpuric macular or patchy eruption, and less than 10% of the body surface
showing epidermal detachment. The erythema multiforme cases were subclassified into
"minor" if one or no mucosal surface was involved and "major" if more than one mucosal
surface was affected. All three forms of Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis had greater than 50% of the body surface affected with macular or purpuric
eruption, greater than one mucosal surface involved, and no target or polycyclic lesions.
With this classification scheme, it was shown that only 19% of erythema multiforme
was associated with drug exposure, whereas 92% of Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic
epidermal necrolysis cases were associated with drug exposure. Histopathologic findings
showed an overlap between the groups, suggesting that, at least in this canine classification
system, biopsy and histopathologic examination was not able to separate the two entities,
though the erythema multiforme cases did have less epidermal necrosis and greater
dermal inflammation than the Stevens-Johnson syndrome-toxic epidermal necrolysis cases.
Further studies are indicated to document the validity and usefulness of this classification
system in dogs. We and others 273 think that the histopathologic findings of erythema
multiforme and toxic epidermal necrolysis in dogs, as in humans, are quite different.
A major distinction still to address is the typical target lesion. This appears to be a
major feature for the diagnosis of erythema multiforme in humans but has not been
addressed in the dog. The typical target lesion is defined as a highly regular, well-defined,
round, wheal-like erythematous papule or plaque of less than 3 cm in diameter that has at

• Table 9-8

PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR THE CLINICAL
CLASSIFICATION OF ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME
AND STEVENS-JOHNSON SYNDROME-TOXIC
EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS292

CLINICAL LESIONS

EM min

EM rna]

SJS

OVERLAP

TEN

Flat or raised, focal or multifocal, target or
polycyclic lesions
Number of mucosal surfaces involved
Erythematous or purpuric, macular or patchy
eruption (percent of body surface)
Epidermal detachment (percent of body surface)

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

None or 1
<50

>1
<50

>1
>50

>1
>50

>1
>50

<10

<10

<10

10-30

>30

EM min = erythema multiforme minor; EM maj = erythema multifonne major; sJs = Stevens-Johnson syndrome; OVERLAP
= SJS-TEN overlap syndrome; TEN = toxic epidermal necrolysis.

734 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

least three different zones, which are composed of two concentric rings around a central
disk (Fig. 9-38A). The central disk varies from erythematous to violaceous, dusky, purpuric, or necrotic and may vesiculate. The inner ring is edematous and pale, the outer ring
("halo") is erythematous.298.307 This "typical target lesion" has been detected in 15.9% of
dogs with erythema multiforme.P" This aspect needs to be more carefully reevaluated in
veterinary medicine.
Erythema multiforme is uncommon in dogs and cats, accounting for only 0.4% and
0.11%, respectively, of all the canine and feline dermatology cases examined at a university practice.P" Erythema multiforme has been recognized in dogs in association with
infections, drug therapy (especially trimethoprim-potentiated sulfonamides, penicillins, and
cephalosporins), and idiopathy (Table 9_9).47.56.269.291,302.308,318,322,323 Two cases of druginduced erythema multiforme have been associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation. 311, 318 Erythema multiforme has also been reported to be a manifestation of adverse
reactions to dietary substances.P" In one study, 22.8% of the cases of canine erythema
multiforme were idiopathic. 323 A subgroup of idiopathic erythema multiforme has been
described in old dogs, occasionally associated with an underlying disease, suggesting immune dysfunction.P In cats, erythema multiforme has been reported in association with
drug therapy (cephalexin, penicillin, aurothioglucose, trimethoprim-sulfonamide, amoxicillin, griseofulvin, propylthiouracil) and herpesvirus infection wherein lesions may accompany upper respiratory signs and resolve when the respiratory disease resolves.v 323, 385
CLINICAL SIGNS

Prodromal or concurrent clinical signs may reflect the underlying cause. As the term
multiforme implies, the skin lesions are variable, but they are usually characterized by an
acute, rather symmetric onset of (1) erythematous macules (see Fig. 9-38B) or slightly

• Table 9-9

REPORTED ETIOLOGIC FACTORS FOR CANINE
ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME40, 307
Antibiotics
Amoxicillin
Amoxicillin clavulanate
Cephalexin
Chloramphenicol
Enrofloxacin
Erythromycin
Gentamicin
Lincomycin
Ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine
Tetracycline
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

Infections
Pseudomonal otitis extema
Staphylococcal dermatitis
Anal sacculitis

Miscellaneous
Aurothioglucose
Chlorpyrifos
Beef and/or soy (in diet and chewable heartworm preventive)
Diethylcarbamazine
D-limonene
Idiopathic
Ivermectin
Levamisole
L-Thyroxine
Otic drops
Phenobarbital

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 735

FIGURE 9-38. A, Erythema multiforme minor in a dog caused by Tribrissen, Annular, erythematous, target
lesions in flank. B, Canine erythema multiforme due to cephalexin. Serpiginous erythema. C, Toxic epidermal
necrolysis in a cat. (From Rosenkrantz WS: Cutaneous drug reactions. In: Griffin CE, et aI reds]: Current
Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.) D, Severe ulceration of the ventrum, medial thighs,
and scrotum of a dog with toxic epidermal necrolysis due to levamisole. (Courtesy G. T. Wilkinson.) E, Ulcerated
footpads in a dog with idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis. F, Cutaneous idiopathic vasculitis in a dog. Necrosis and
ulceration tracing pinnal vasculature. G, Punctate ulcers on the tongue of a dog with idiopathic leukocytoclastic
vasculitis. H, Pitting edema of the hock in a dog with vasculitis.

736 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-39. Idiopathic erythema multiforme major in a dog.
More-or-less symmetric necrosis and
ulceration in the groin.

elevated papules that spread peripherally and clear centrally, producing annular (target) or
arciform patterns (see Fig. 9-38A), (2) urticarial plaques, (3) vesicles and bullae, or (4)
some combination thereof. The classic target ("iris," "doughnut") lesion is a papular to
plaque-like lesion wherein the periphery remains indurated while the center clears anclJor
becomes cyanotic to purpuric (see Fig. 9_38A).323 These lesions may then become centrally vesicular or bullous, eventuating in epidermal necrosis with resultant slough and
oozing erosions and ulcers. Mucosal lesions are similar in onset and symmetry but are
usually vesicular, bullous, and ulcerative. The oral ulcers are often hemorrhagic and
coated by grayish-white pseudomembranes of necrotic epithelium and fibrin. The maculopapular form of erythema multiforme initially is characterized by lack of surface pathology
(lack of scale, crust, oozing, hair loss). The urticarial form of erythema multiforme is
characterized by a normal overlying skin and haircoat and the persistence of urticarial
lesions, as opposed to the evanescent nature of the wheals in true urticaria.
Patients with maculopapular eruptions are usually asymptomatic. Other animals become systemically ill (fever, depression, anorexia) and have rather extensive vesiculobullous and ulcerative lesions. The most commonly affected body sites in dogs include the

FIGURE 9-40. Idiopathic erythema multiforme major. Marked
vesiculobulIous and ulcerative cheilitis, stomatitis, and glossitis.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 737

FIGURE 9-41. Idiopathic erythema rnultiforme major. Well-delineated ulceration and necrosis of latera! surface of pinna.

ventrum (Fig. 9-39) (especially axillae and groin; 65.9% of cases), mucocutaneous junctions (47.7%), and oral cavity (Fig. 9-40) (31.8%), pinnae (Fig. 9-41) (25%), and footpads (20.5%).323 Skin lesions are occasionally painful (22.7%) but rarely pruritic (4.5%).
Target lesions (15.9%), Nikolsky's sign (11.4%), and pitting edema of the distal limbs
(11.4%) occur occasionally.F" In dogs, 86.4% of cases are predominantly vesiculobullous
and/or ulcerative, whereas only 13.6% are predominantly maculopapular.P''
In cats, lesions are predominantly vesiculobullous and/or ulcerative (Fig. 9-42), and
the trunk and mucocutaneous junctions are most commonly affected.F"
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, urticaria, and other vesicular and pustular disorders. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, ruling out of alteruatives with laboratory testing, and skin biopsy.
Skin biopsy findings vary with the gross morphology of the lesions and do not reliably
distinguish between clinically mild and severe forms of the disorder.P- 47. 71, 308, 323 Neither
are there any apparent histopathologic differences between cases with suspected triggers

FIGURE 9-42. Erythema multiforme in a cat associated with multiple drugs. Marked vesiculobullous
and ulcerative disease of pinnae.
(Courtesy C. Tieghi.)

738 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-43. Erythema multiforme in a dog due to trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole. Note hydropic degeneration, marked apoptosis (arrow)
at all levels of epidermis, and lymphocytic exocytosis. Also note mild
epidermal hyperplasia and normal
stratum corneum.

and those without (i.e., idiopathic).323 Maculopapular lesions are characterized histologically by hydropic interface dermatitis with prominent single-cell apoptosis of keratinocytes
at all levels of the epidermis and satellitosis of lymphocytes and macrophages (Figs. 9-43
and 9-44). The infundibular region of hair follicle outer root sheath epithelium is often
similarly affected. In the absence of necrosis, ulceration, and bacterial infection, the
stratum corneum is orthokeratotic and normal, and the epidermis shows mild to moderate, regular hyperplasia. A superficial interstitial or, rarely, a dense lichenoid inflammatory
infiltrate is visible.
Urticarial lesions are characterized by hydropic interface dermatitis and striking dermal edema (Fig. 9-45). Dermal collagen fibers become vertically oriented and attenuated,
presenting a weblike appearance ("gossamer" collagen). Vesiculobullous lesions are characterized by segmental full-thickness coagulation necrosis of epithelium (Fig. 9-46). A
superficial perivascular to interstitial accumulation of predominantly lymphohistiocytic cells
is typical, and subepidermal cleft and vesicle formation may occur owing to separation of
the necrotic epithelium from the underlying connective tissue at the basement membrane
zone. Pigmentary incontinence is common.

FIGURE 9-44. Erythema multiforme in a dog due to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Note apoptotic keratinocytes and one adherent
lymphocyte ("satellitosis") (arrow).

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 739

FIGURE 9-45. Canine erythema multiforme. Marked dermal edema with vertical stretching of
collagen fibers ( "gossamer collagen").

Direct immunofluorescence testing usually yields negative results but may demonstrate IgG, IgM, or C3 between epidermal keratinocytes, around globoid bodies in the
superficial dermis, or in association with dermal blood vessel walls.F: 273. 323

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Erythema multiforme may run a mild course, spontaneously regressing within a few
weeks. An underlying cause should be sought and corrected, whenever possible, a procedure that also results in spontaneous resolution of the erythema multiforme.P- 47, 323

FIGURE 9-46. Canine erythema
multiforme major, The upper half of
the epidermis has undergone coagulation necrosis and has separated
from the viable epidermis below,

740 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
Severe vesiculobullous cases of erythema multiforme require supportive care and an
exhaustive search for underlying causes. When trigger factors can be identified and eliminated, the erythema multiforme usually resolves within 3 weeks. 323
In human medicine, the use of immunosuppressive drugs, especially glucocorticoids,
in the treatment of erythema multiforme continues to be controversial.s?" 323 Given the
presumed immune-mediated pathogenesis of erythema multiforme, treatment with immunomodulating drugs would seem to make sense in cases in which elimination of potential
trigger factors has been achieved yet the disease persists. 323 In fact, dogs with severe
idiopathic erythema multiforme have been successfully treated with large doses of glucocorticoids and/or azathioprine.F"
Anecdotal reports suggest that cyclosporine's" or etretinate''!" may be useful in idiopathic erythema multiforme in dogs. We have used pentoxifylline successfully in a few
cases, and this drug may warrant a trial prior to immunosuppressive drugs. All idiopathic
cases should receive a novel antigen ("hypoallergenic") diet to rule out diet-related disease. 323 Even "idiopathic" cases have been known to spontaneously resolve after 4 to 12
months, suggesting that undocumented antigenic triggers had been eliminated.s'"

Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is a rare, variably painful, extensive vesiculobullous and ulcerative disorder of skin and oral mucosa in dogs, cats, and human beings. Less extensive
cutaneous with mucosal involvement is often called Stevens-Johnson syndrome, though
confusion in the veterinary and human literature has equated this with more severe
erythema multiforme.P"

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In humans, toxic epidermal necrolysis has been temporally associated with drugs in 80%
to 95% of cases.P'" Fifty percent of the cases of Stevens-Johnson syndrome are also drugrelated.P" A variety of drugs and causes have been associated with toxic epidermal
necrolysis in dogs (see Table 9_9).56,282,291,317,324 Flea dips were implicated in both a dog
and cat that experienced toxic epidermal necrolysis.P" Some cases are idiopathic.
Although the pathomechanism of toxic epidermal necrolysis is unknown, immunopathologic mechanisms have been suggested. 18 It has also been suggested that druginduced erythema multiforme major and toxic epidermal necrolysis may relate to defective
epidermal detoxification of drug byproducts.P" Fadok proposed that apoptosis may be
induced and that it is massive and sudden in toxic epidermal necrolysis, but localized and
more gradual in erythema multiforme.P" In humans, apoptosis seems to be the key
mechanism leading to keratinocyte death, and TNF -(¥ is a major cytokine involved in
apoptosis.P" 313, 314, 325
Perforin (a cytoplasmic peptide contained in cytotoxic T lymphocytes and natural
killer cells) has been suggested to playa role in keratinocyte apoptosis.P? In addition, the
role of calcium in the regulation of apoptosis is crucial, and the expression of calprotectin
(a calcium-binding protein) is increased in the epidermis of patients with toxic epidermal
necrolysis.s!' This information has led to the hypothesis that toxic drug metabolites stimulate keratinocytes to produce TNF -(¥ and perturb calcium homeostasis, which leads to
keratinocyte apoptosis in the absence of inflammatory cells. Other studies have suggested
that the upregulation of keratinocyte Fas ("cell-surface death receptor," CD95) is the
critical trigger of keratinocyte destruction.F"
In dogs, one study could not demonstrate apoptosis in any of seven cases of toxic
epidermal necrolysis, and it was thought that the epidermis in these cases was undergoing
necrosis by a pathologic mechanism different from apoptosis.P

CLINICAL FEATURES
There are no apparent age, breed, or sex predilections. Clinically, toxic epidermal necrolysis is usually characterized by an acute onset of constitutional signs (pyrexia, anorexia,

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 741

lethargy, depression) and a multifocal or generalized vesiculobullous disease (see Fig. 938C and D). This may be a major differentiating feature from erythema multiforme

because, in humans, all cases of toxic epidermal necrolysis are preceded by pyrexia.30 1
Vesicles and bullae, necrosis, and resultant ulcers with epidermal collarettes may be found
anywhere in the skin and often involve the oral mucosa, mucocutaneous junctions, and
footpads. Nikolsky's sign is usually present. Cutaneous pain is usually moderate to marked.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis is relatively limited in severe cases with constitutional signs and
acute history, and it includes bums, systemic lupus erythematosus, severe erythema multiforme, superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis, and epitheliotropic lymphoma.
Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. A
hemogram usually reveals neutropenia or neutrophilia. 56 In humans, persistent neutropenia portends a fatal outcome.l"

HISTOPATHOLOGY
Histopathologic findings in toxic epidermal necrolysis are identical, regardless of underlying cause. They consist of hydropic degeneration of basal epidermal cells, full-thickness
coagulation necrosis of the epidermis, and minimal dermal inflammation (silent dermis or
cell-poor inflammation) (Fig. 9_47).22,47.71 Dermo-epidermal separation results in subepidermal vesicles (Fig. 9-48). This is in contrast with the cell-rich inflammation that occurs
in erythema multiforme.P" 323 The periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive basement membrane zone, when present, is usually located at the floor of the vesicles. The infundibular
region of hair follicle outer root sheath epithelium may be similarly affected. In humans,
the atrichous sweat gland duct is often affected, but this has not been studied in animals. 296 It must be emphasized that toxic epidermal necrolysis is not usually the definitive
diagnosis. It is imperative to remember that toxic epidermal necrolysis is only a cutaneous
reaction pattern, and every attempt must be made to find the underlying cause.

FIGURE 9-47. Canine toxic epidermal necrolysis (associated with staphylococcal endocarditis). Full-thickness epidermal coagulation necrosis with minimal inflammation. (From Scott
DW, et al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis in two dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271,
1979.)

742 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-48. Canine toxic epidermal necrolysis (staphylococcal endocarditis). Full-thickness epidermal coagulation necrosis with subepidermal cleft formation. (From Scott DW, et
aI: Toxic epidermal necrolysis in two dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271, 1979.)

Results of direct and indirect immunofluorescence testing are usually negative. 18, 56, 269
In humans, immunohistochemical studies have shown that the cell-poor infiltrate in toxic
epidermal necrolysis contains predominantly macrophages and dermal dendrocytes, unlike
the cell-rich infiltrate rich in T lymphocytes found in erythema multtforme.v"

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for toxic epidermal necrolysis is guarded to poor, pending identification of
the underlying cause, with a mortality rate as high as 50% in humans."? The mortality is
greatest in idiopathic cases, wherein a precipitating factor cannot be recognized and
specifically corrected. The sequelae and prognosis are similar to those of a massive
second-degree bum, owing to fluid, electrolyte, and colloid losses and to secondary infections and sepsis that compound the loss of epidermal barrier function. Mortality rates are
lower when therapy in humans is conducted in specialty treatment centers for bum
patients. 30l , 303
Treatment consists of (1) correction of the underlying cause and (2) symptomatic and
supportive measures (e.g., fluids, antibiotics, topicals). The use of systemic glucocorticoids
is controversial, some investigators thinking that these drugs are at best not helpful and, at
worst, detrimental." The incidence of sepsis resulting in a higher fatality rate is the
greatest concern, so the severity and extent of involvement may relate to the decision as
to whether to use glucocorticoids. The administration of systemic glucocorticoids may be
indicated, however, in drug-induced cases. IS Plasmapheresis has been beneficial in humans. 303 Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy has been reported to be effective in humans, presumably via Fas (CD95) blockade.i''" Recovery (depending on the identification
and correction of the underlying cause) usually occurs in 2 to 3 weeks.

Vasculitis
Cutaneous vasculitis is an uncommon disorder in dogs that is characterized by purpura
(often palpable), wheals, edema, papules, plaques, nodules, alopecia, scarring, necrosis,
and ulceration, often involving the extremities. In some cases, the lesions are slightly

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 743

purpuric, appearing erythematous but not blanching with diascopy. Cutaneous vasculitis is
rare in cats.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Vasculitides are classified histologically into neutrophilic, eosinophilic, lymphocytic, granulomatous, mixed forms, and cell-poor forms.f"- 72 The neutrophilic forms may be leukocytoclastic (neutrophil nuclei undergo karyorrhexis, resulting in "nuclear dust") or nonleukocytoclastic.l- 18 In dogs, the nonleukocytoclastic form is more common, and two other
forms of neutrophilic vasculitis occur.P In one there are associated skin lesions such as
intraepidermal pustules, folliculitis, or neutrophilic spongiosis, and this pattern may be
associated with bacterial skin infections or drug reactions. In the third neutrophilic form,
the major lesion is thrombosis and resultant tissue ischemia. This pattern is more often
associated with gram-negative septicemia and infections that target the endothelial cells.P
Eosinophilic vasculitis is associated with arthropod reactions, food hypersensitivity,
eosinophilic granuloma, and mast cell tumors.P- 72, 342 However, the "vasculitic" nature of
these eosinophil-associated lesions has been challenged.v" Interstitial granulomatous dermatitis with vasculitis associated with cyclosporine administration was observed in a dog
with periocular edema and alopecia and a swelling at the base of one ear. 349 In humans,
vasculitis is also categorized by the size of the affected vessel (large or small), though this
has been considered of little value in the dog and cat. 72, 339 In most cases, cutaneous
vasculitis involves small dermal blood vessels (postcapillary venules). Vasculitis can occur
via immune and nonimmune mechanisms.P: 330, 341 As a cause of cutaneous disease,
vasculitis most commonly is thought to be immunologically mediated and the result of a
drug reaction or infection.F: 347
The pathomechanism of most cutaneous vasculitides is assumed to involve Type III
hypersensitivity reactions. 14, 60-64, 69 Type I hypersensitivity reactions may be important in
the initiation of immune complex deposition in blood vessel walls. However, it appears to
be more complex, and multiple mechanisms likely playa role. It has been postulated that
differences in membrane receptors (probably adhesion molecules and cytokines) for immunoglobulin and complement on leukocytes may account for the different histologic
appearances of neutrophilic and lymphocytic vasculitides." Additionally, initial neutrophilinduced damage to endothelial cells could result in the expression of "not self' antigens,
whereupon dendritic cells and T cells could initiate a secondary cell-mediated immune
response, thus perpetuating the vascular disease and producing a lymphocyte-dominated
infiltrate.P? In cutaneous necrotizing vasculitis, endothelial cells show increased expression
of ICAM-l and E-selectin. 347 E-selectin is an adhesion molecule for neutrophils. In some
cases and forms of vasculitis there has been an association with the presence of autoantibodies that react with neutrophil cytoplasmic structures (e.g., proteinase-3, myeloperoxidase) or endothelial cells. 337, 347
Cutaneous vasculitis may be associated with coexisting disease (infections, food hypersensitivity, insect bites, malignancies, connective tissue disorders [such as lupus erythematosus]), precipitating factors (infections, drugs, vaccines), or it may be idiopathic (about
50% of all cases)." Infections may induce immune complex or septic vasculitis. 22, 72, 282
About 7.5% of the dogs treated with itraconazole at 10 mglkglday experience cutaneous
vasculitis (lymphedema and/or necrotizing lesions on one or more limbs), whereas dogs
treated with 5 mglkglday do not experience this reaction.P" Focal cutaneous vasculitis
reactions at the site of rabies vaccination have been described in dogs, and rabies viral
antigen was detected in blood vessel walls.F' In a retrospective study of cutaneous
vasculitis in 18 dogs and 1 cat, food hypersensitivity was diagnosed in 2 dogs, adverse drug
reaction in 2 dogs, rabies vaccine reaction in 4 dogs, and the condition was idiopathic in
10 dogs. The 1 cat had vaccine-related vasculitis. 342

·See references 12, 18, 56, 72, 282, 330, 337, 340-342.

744 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

Certain breeds may be predisposed, such as Jack Russell terriers, Scottish terriers,
German shepherd dogs, Greyhounds, Dachshunds, and Hottweilers.P" 328. 343. 344. 350 Vaccine
reactions are more commonly recognized in Poodles, silky terriers, Yorkshire terriers,
Pekingese, and Maltese, which may reflect breed predilection, small body size, or the long
period of anagen hair growth and "fuzzy" haircoat phenotype in these breeds.F" In one
survey, two of four cases were the Bichon breed, one Maltese and one Poodle. 342 The
breed associations may suggest some genetic component to the etiology of some forms of
vasculitis, as has been suggested in humans because of HLA associations.P'"

CLINICAL FEATURES
Skin is often the only organ system involved. However, other organ systems may be
affected, wherein the skin lesions may represent the initial sign of a systemic disease. Skin
lesions typically occur in dependent areas of the body, in skin over areas of pressure and
normal "wear and tear," and in skin covering extremities (pinnae, tip of tail, and so forth)
that are more susceptible to cold environmental influences. Cutaneous signs of vasculitis
usually include palpable purpura, plaques, hemorrhagic bullae, papules or pustules, necrosis, punched-out (crateriform) ulcers, and occasionally acrocyanosis, especially involving
the extremities (paws, pinnae, lips, tail, scrotum, and oral mucosa), and they may clearly
be associated with vascular pathways (see Fig. 9-38E to G; Figs. 9-49 to 9-54).

FIGURE 9-49. Ulcerated nodule on the leg of a
dog with eosinophilic vasculitis.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 745

FIGURE 9-50. Purpuric hives in a
dog with food hypersensitivity vasculitis.

FIGURE 9-51. Pinnal lesions in a
dog with vasculitis. The pinnal apex
shows acrocyanosis and an infarct.

FIGURE 9-52. Subungual hemorrhage in a claw of a dog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. This
clinical appearance suggests vascular
damage.

746 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-53. Footpads of a dog
with vasculitis, Note multiple crusted
depressions (pits) representing healed
and healing infarcts.

FIGURE 9-54. Lymphedema of the rear limb in
a dog with vasculitis.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 747
Pinnal lesions are often more prevalent on the apex and concave surface (see Fig. 951). Hemorrhages may occur within the claw (see Fig. 9-52). Pads may develop central
punched-out ulcers (see Fig. 9-38E) or depressed scarred or crusted plaques (see Fig. 953). Generalized urticaria may occur and, in our experience as well as in the results of
one study, this is more common with food hypersensitivity as the underlying etiology (see
Fig. 9-50).342 Edematous plaques and lymphedema may be present on the extremities or
in the groin (see Figs. 9-38H and 9-54). The lesions mayor may not be painful. In
some animals, widespread erythema that may be purplish or cyanotic occurs. The erythematous skin does not blanch with diascopy, confirming its purpuric nature (Fig. 955).330 Rarely, subcutaneous nodules are noted, which represent panniculitis caused by
septal vasculitis.P" 345 Constitutional signs may be present, including anorexia, depression,
and pyrexia. Although extracutaneous signs are uncommon, polyarthropathy, myopathy,
neuropathy, hepatopathy, thrombocytopenia, and anemia have been reported in some dogs
and cats. 330 • 338, 341 Any age, breed, or sex may be affected.
A proliferative thromhovascular necrosis of the pinnae has been recognized in
dogs. 333, 334 The etiology is unknown, and there are no apparent age, breed, or sex
predilections, Lesions begin on the apical margins of the pinnae and spread along the
concave surface. An elongated necrotic ulcer is at the center of the lesions. There is often
a thickened, scaly, hyperpigmented zone surrounding the ulcers (Fig. 9-56A and B), The

FIGURE 9-55. A, Abdomen of
dog with drug-induced vasculitis and
purpura. B, Erythema fails to blanch
with diascopy, confinning dermal
hemorrhage,

748 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-56. A, Pinnal thrombovascular necrosis with erythema of pinnal apex and linear crust on lateral
surface and margin of pinna. B, Wedge-shaped hyperpigmented to erythematous plaque with ulceration of pinnal
margin in a dog with pinnal thrombovascular necrosis. C, Canine linear IgA pustular dermatosis. Annular, coalescing
areas of alopecia, scaling, crusting, and hyperpigmentation.
Legend continued on opposite page

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 749

FIGURE 9-57. Alopecic, hyperpigmented plaque on caudomedial
thigh of a Poodle due to postvaccinal vasculitis.

lesions are wedge-shaped, with the wide base at the pinnal apex. As the ulcer enlarges,
the older areas undergo complete necrosis, resulting in a deformed pinnal margin.
A focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia at the sites of rabies vaccination has been
described in dogs. 22, 253, 270, 327, 351 Poodles and Yorkshire and silky terriers appeared to be
predisposed, Reactions were characterized by roughly annular areas of variable alopecia,
hyperpigmentation, and, less commonly, scaling or erythema overlying a variably indurated
dermis and subcutis. The caudal or lateral thigh, or the withers, are typically affected (Fig.
9-57). The lesions generally appear 3 to 6 months after the subcutaneous administration
of vaccine and persist for months to years.
A cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy ("Alabama rot," "Greenetrack disease") has been described in kenneled and racing, related and unrelated, Greyhounds (see
Chap. 12).328,329 No age (6 months to 6 years) or sex predilections exist. Palpable purpura,
with lesions pinpoint to 10 em in diameter, is characterized by reddened areas that rapidly
become dark red to purple to black and then slough. Lesions are multiple and most
commonly occur on the limbs and, less commonly, the groin and trunk (Figs. 9-58 and
9-59). Within 1 to 2 days, the lesions ulcerate and discharge a serosanguineous fluid. The
ulcers are well-demarcated and usually extend into the subcutis. Healing is slow, resulting
in scar formation within 1 to 2 months. Many dogs experience pitting edema, especially
distal to the stifle or elbow, on limbs that have ulcers. In most dogs, new lesions do not
develop after the initial lesions resolve. Some dogs experience pyrexia, lethargy, polydipsia,
polyuria, vomiting, dark or tarry stools, and acute renal failure. This syndrome is thought
to be produced by verotoxin (shiga-like toxin) elaborated by E. coli in contaminated raw
beef products (similar to the herrwlytic-uremic syndrome in people).329 A genetic predisposition may help explain the susceptibility of Creyhounds.P'"
Familial (autosomal recessive trait) cutaneous vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs

FIGURE 9-56. Continued D, Canine uveodermatologic syndrome. Depigmentation of nose, muzzle, and periocular skin.
E, Canine uveodermatologic syndrome. Depigmentation of lips. F, Uveodermatologic syndrome in an Akita. (From MacDonald JM: Uveodermatologic syndrome in the dog. In: Griffin CE, et aI reds]: Current Veterinary Dermatology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1993.) G, Feline auricular chondritis. Swollen, curled, misshapen pinnae. (Courtesy E. Cuaguere.) H,
Feline auricular chondritis. Swollen, violaceous pinna. (Courtesy E. Cuaguere.)

750 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-58. Cutaneous vasculopathy in a Greyhound. Large area of
purpura on ventral abdomen, and
well-circumscribed necrosis and ulceration of left medial thigh. (Courtesy
B. Fenwick.)

FIGURE 9-59. Cutaneous vasculopathy in a
Greyhound. Marked lymphedema of left hind leg,
and multifocal necrosis and ulceration of right hind
leg. (Courtesy B. Fenwick.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 751

has been reported in young puppies."? These dogs experience pyrexia and lethargy, most
commonly associated with swollen, depigmented foot pads. Alopecia, crusts, and ulceration
may also occur, involving the pinnae, tail, and nasal planum. Footpad biopsies demonstrate varying degrees and combinations of nodular dermatitis, collagenolysis, vascular
degeneration, vasculitis, and cell-poor interface dermatitis with basal cell apoptosis. The
changes may partly reflect the stage of disease at the time of biopsy. The cause is not
determined, though a variety of immunologic test results have been normal.
Ischemic dermatopathy is a syndrome that results from loss of blood supply from
either vasculitis or vasculopathy. In some cases, a relationship between vasculitis and
vasculopathy is present because both histopathologic lesions may occur in the same case
and may reflect stage of lesion development at time of sampling" This syndrome is
exemplified by what has been called the prototypical form of ischemic dermatopathy, postrabies vaccination alopecia.P" In addition, lesions of canine dermatomyositis are thought to
represent ischemic dermatopathy. 72. 332. 348 This has also been proposed for the vascular
diseases that are considered cell-poor, such as familial German shepherd vasculopathy,
some "lupoid" dermatoses, and the disease in Creyhounds.P To date, the reports primarily
have been associated with vaccine reactions, with lesions occurring in a wider distribution
than just at the site of vaccination.P'< 348 A typical postvaccinal lesion is visible at the site
of injection about 2 to 8 months after vaccination, and multiple multifocal lesions develop
within 1 to 5 months after the appearance of the injection site lesion. The lesions are
various combinations of plaques, nodules, alopecia, scale, erosions, ulcers, crusts, hyperpigmentation, and scarring (see Fig. 9-57). Lesions may occur at the site of vaccination,
pinnae (usually the apex and often the concave surface, especially at the pinnal margins),
face, paw pads, tip of the tail, periocular region, and over bony prominences. Erosions
and ulcers may be seen on the tongue. An associated ischemic, atrophic myopathy may be
present.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes coagulopathy, systemic lupus erythematosus, cold agglutinin disease, frostbite, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and lymphoreticular neoplasia. When urticarial lesions predominate, hypersensitivity disorders not associated with
vasculitis are also differential diagnoses. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination, and skin biopsy. Histopathology reveals varying degrees of neutrophilic,
eosinophilic, or lymphocytic vasculitis (Fig. 9-60), possibly reflecting the age of the
lesions and the types of immunoreactants.w 71 Fibrinoid necrosis is not usually present. 4 7 , 348 Involvement of deep dermal vessels may suggest systemic disease.
When the deep vasculature is affected, necrosis of appendages and subcutaneous fat
may occur. The lesions most likely to show diagnostic changes are those from 8 to 24
hours old. In some biopsies, the diagnosis of vasculitis or vasculopathy is suspected on the
basis of a cell-poor hydropic interface dermatitis, mural folliculitis, and the loss of definition and staining intensity and ultimate atrophy or necrosis of hair follicles ("fading
follicles") (Fig. 9-61). Sebaceous and sweat glands may be similarly, but less frequently,
affected. Hyalinization of dermal collagen and hypovascularity as demonstrated by decreased factor VIII staining of blood vessels may be present.P" Once the diagnosis of
cutaneous vasculitis has been established, it is imperative that underlying etiologic factors
be sought and eliminated (Table 9-10).
Cutaneous vasculitis has been reported in dogs with bacteremia, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, polyarteritis nodosa, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis, babesiosis, leishmaniasis, sarcocystosis, parvovirus and coronavirus infections, drug
reactions, vaccine reactions, staphylococcal hypersensitivity, and as an idiopathic occurrence.s"- 56. 330. 335, 341 In addition, lymphocytic or eosinophilic vasculitis has been recognized
in dogs with drug reaction, severe scabies and flea bite hypersensitivity, food hypersensitivity, and arthropod bites/stings.f" 72. 342 In cats, cutaneous vasculitis has been associated
with drug administration, vaccination (rabies, herpes virus-calictvirus-panleukopenia), infections (FeLV, FIV, FIP), and idiopathy.F': 338,341

752 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-60. Canine cutaneous idiopathic leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Degeneration of
blood vessel wall with leukocytoclasis and "nuclear dust" formation. (From Manning TO,
Scott OW: Cutaneous vasculitis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:61, 1980.)

Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae is characterized by arteriolar
proliferation, sclerosis, hyaline degeneration, and eventually thrombosis.P" No inflammatory vasculitis is present. Focal vasculitis and alopecia subsequent to rabies vaccination is
characterized by vasculitis affecting the arterioles of the deep dermis and subcutis, septal
panniculitis, fat necrosis, focal lymphoid nodules, and marked atrophy or necrosis of the
overlying adnexa (see Fig. 9-61; Figs. 9-62 and 9_63).,341
Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy is characterized by mild to severe
changes in the arterioles and arteries of the deep dermis and subcutis.F" These changes
range from increased eosinophilia of the tunica media to pyknosis and karyorrhexis and,
occasionally, fibrinoid necrosis. Vascular thrombosis and ischemia result in purpura and
cutaneous infarcts. Many affected Greyhounds, especially those with azotemia, have
thrombocytopenia, normocytic normochromic anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and increased
serum creatine kinase activity.:J29
Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing may demonstrate immunoglobulin, complement, or both in vessel walls and occasionally at the basement membrane zone in both the neutrophilic and lymphocytic forms of cutaneous vasculitis (see
Fig. 9-1D).5. 18.56 In humans, the most common immunoreactants are C3, IgM, and fibrin
in a granular pattern within the vessel walI.:J41 These tests are usually not needed, however, and are not particularly useful for diagnosis. If they are performed, they are best
done within the first 4 hours after lesion formation and no later than 24 hours.f" 341
Studies in humans have shown that the intradermal injection of 0.02 ml of a histamine
phosphate solution into the skin of patients with active cutaneous vasculitis was a reliable
method for demonstrating the deposition of immunoreactants, with direct immunofluorescence testing of the injection site performed 4 hours after injection."
Dogs with active vasculitis may have increased levels of circulating immune complexes, decreased levels of serum complement, and hypergammaglobulinemiaY
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
It is difficult to predict the course of the disease in any individual case. A single episode
lasting a few weeks may occur, or the disorder may be chronic or recurrent. The outcome

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 753

FIGURE 9-61. Rabies vaccine-induced vasculitis
in a dog. Ischemic necrosis of hair follicles ("fading
follicles") (arrow) with subjacent panniculitis.

depends on the extent of internal organ involvement (especially renal and neurologic) and
the underlying or precipitating factor(s).
Treatment of vasculitis consists of correction of the underling cause and immunomodulatory drug treatment. 18. 56 In less severe cases, initial therapy with pentoxifYlline is
indicated because of its relative lack of side effects and some reports of success (see
Chap. 3).342. 348 Pentoxifylline was apparently effective in four of seven rabies vaccineassociated vasculitides (which required 2 to .5 months of therapy) but was of no benefit in
leukocytoclastic vasculitides.P'< :348 In more severe cases of vasculitis, especially neutrophilic
types, systemic prednisone or prednisolone (2 to 4 mglkg orally q24h) is initially used,
with or without pentoxifylline.f" 330, 338 For cases that are refractory to glucocorticoids,
sulfones such as dapsone (1 mg/kg orally q8h in dogs; 1 mg/kg orally q24h with caution in
cats) or sulfasalazine (20 to 40 mg/kg orally q8h in dogs) may be effective.f" :340, .341, :343 The
combination of glucocorticoid and dapsone may be synergistic,343 Large doses of vitamin E
may be a useful adjunctive therapy.341, 343 Cyclophosphamide has been useful in some
patients.t? and colchicine is often beneficial in humans.l" Azathioprine has been effective
in some dogs, as has the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide.P" In some cases,
therapy can be stopped after 4 to 6 months of treatment. Other patients require longterm maintenance therapy with lower drug doses and reduced frequency of administration
(see Chap, 3). The vasculitis occurring with itraconazole therapy can often be eliminated
by reducing the dose from 10 mg/kg/day to 5 mglkg/day (see Chap. 5),

754 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
• Table 9-10

ETIOLOGIC FACTORS FOR CUTANEOUS
VASCULITIS
Infections

Bacterial
Mycobacterial
Fungal
Viral
Protozoal
Rickettsial
Injections ofForeign Proteins

Sera
Vaccines
Hyposensitization
Drugs

Antibiotics
Ivermectin
Vaccines
Metronidazole
Phenobarbital
Furosemide
Itraconazole
Phenylbutazone
Enalapril
Imodium
Metoclopramide
Fenbendazole
Allergy

Food
Insect/arthropod

Genetic
Hereditary pyogranuloma and vasculitis of Scottish terriers
Cutaneous and renal vasculopathy of Greyhounds
Familial vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs and Jack
Russell terriers
Dermatomyositis
Immune-Mediated Diseoses
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
OtherDiseases
Plasma cell pododermatitis
Malignancies
Ulcerative colitis
Juvenile polyarteritis in beagle dogs

Proliferative thrombooascular necrosis of the pinnae is slowly progressive and usually
unresponsive to all medical therapies that have been tried. 333 Anecdotal reports suggest
that pentoxifylline or the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide are occasionally
effective. 341 In our experience, pentoxifylline has been helpful to totally successful in
thrombotic pinnal diseases, possibly through its effect of increasing peripheral perfusion
and/or its anti-inflammatory effects.
If pentoxifylline is ineffective, the treatment of choice is partial surgical removal of
the pinna. Relapses have occurred only when attempts were made to save as much tissue
as possible. Focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia subsequent to injections may also
respond (up to 75% reduction in lesion size) to pentoxifylline or may be treated by
complete surgical excision, or it occasionally spontaneously resolves.V": 348 It would be
logical to not repeat the incriminated vaccine, unless required by law.327, 341 One could

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 7SS

FIGURE 9-62. Rabies vaccine-induced vasculitis in a dog. Panniculitis with atrophied hair follicles and hydropic interface dermatitis.

FIGURE 9-63. Rabies vaccine-induced vasculitis in a dog. Note karyorrhectic leukocytes within vessel
waIl (arrow).

756 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
avoid the local vaccine reaction by giving the product intramuscularly, but generalized
reactions would still be possible.P?

Canine Linear IgA Pustular Dermatosis
Linear IgA pustular dermatosis is a very rare idiopathic, sterile superficial pustular dermatosis of Dachshunds, characterized histologically by subcorneal pustules and immunologically by the deposition of IgA at the basement membrane zone of affected skin. 56. 352 It is
not analogous to a similarly named dermatosis of humans.f 18
Clinically, linear IgA pustular dermatosis is characterized by multifocal to generalized
pustular dermatitis. The trunk is typically involved. Secondary skin lesions include annular
areas of alopecia, erosion, epidermal collarettes, hyperpigmentation, scaling, and crusting
(see Fig. 9-56C). Pruritus is minimal to absent, and the dogs are otherwise healthy. All
cases to date have been recognized in adult Dachshunds of either sex.
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
pemphigus foliaceus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Cytologic examination of pus
reveals nondegenerate neutrophils, no microorganisms, and an occasional or no acantholytic keratinocytes. Diagnosis is based on culture (negative) and skin biopsy (intraepidermal pustular dermatitis, with numerous non degenerate neutrophils and minimal acantholysis) (Fig. 9-64), and direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing (IgA
deposited at the basement membrane zone).
Therapy consists of large doses of prednisolone or prednisone (2.2 to 4.4 mglkg orally
q24h, then an alternate-day regimen) or dapsone (1 mgikg orally q8h, then as needed)
(see Chap. 3). Interestingly, glucocorticoids may work in one case and not another. The
same is true of dapsone.

Canine Uveodermatologic Syndrome
The uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome) is a rare, idiopathic syndrome of concurrent granulomatous uveitis and depigmenting dermatitis in
dogs.361.364

FIGURE 9-64. Canine linear IgA pustular dermatosis. Subcomeal pustular dermatitis.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 757

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

The cause of this syndrome is unknown. The syndrome has similarities to the VogtKoyanagi-Harada syndrome in humans, which is currently thought to represent an autoimmune disorder.!" 353, 356, 358, 359, 364 In humans, cell-mediated hypersensitivity to melanin and
melanocytes has been demonstrated, as have antibodies against melanin, gangliosides, and
photoreceptors.s'" Antiretinal antibodies were demonstrated in a dog. 360
CLINICAL FEATURES

In humans, the Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome has three phases: (1) a meningoencephalitic phase with prodromata of fever, malaise, headache, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting, (2)
an ophthalmic phase with photophobia, uveitis, decreased visual acuity, and potential
blindness, and (3) a dermatologic phase with poliosis (90% of cases), alopecia (73%), and
vitiligo (63%),18,364 The dermatologic signs are usually symmetric, especially involving the
head, neck, and eyelids, and they usually mark the convalescent stage when the uveitis
begins to abate, The pigmentary changes tend to be permanent,
In dogs, there are no apparent age (6 months to 13 years) or sex predilections,
but Akitas, Chows, Samoyeds, and Siberian huskies appear to be predlsposed.Pe 356, 358, 359,
361, 364 The syndrome is usually characterized by the acute onset of uveitis and concurrent
or subsequent depigmentation of the nose, lips, eyelids, and occasionally the footpads,
scrotum, prepuce, anus, and hard palate (see Fig, 9-56D to F), The cutaneous lesions
usually appear within 10 days of the recognition of the ocular lesions, but they occasionally occur several months later. 364
In one dog, a concurrent onychomadesis was present.362 Oral ulcerations rarely occur,358, 363 In most cases, skin lesions are mild, consisting of well-demarcated depigmentation with or without mild erythema and scale. Some cases, however, progress or even
rapidly develop more marked dermatitis, with depigmented areas developing varying degrees of erosion, ulceration, and crusting. Perhaps some of the dermatitis may be associated with exposure to sunlight (photodermatitisj.'? Patchy leukotrichia may be present in
the areas surrounding the cutaneous depigmentation. Rarely, leukoderma and leukotrichia
are widespread.P': 355, 361 Clinicopathologic evidence of a meningoencephalitic phase is rare
in dogs, though one case with second cranial nerve deficits was reported. 357, 364 Clinical
signs referable to the uveitis (anterior and posterior) may include photophobia, blepharospasm, lacrimation, conjunctival congestion, corneal edema, retinal detachment, glaucoma,
cataract, and blindness.v'"
DIAGNOSIS

The definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy. Histopathologic findings in specimens taken from early skin lesions are characterized by lichenoid interface dermatitis, wherein large histiocytes are a major cellular component (Figs.
9-65 and 9_66).22,56.71,364 Pigmentary incontinence is pronounced, but hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells is rare. Cytology of aqueous humor in one case revealed an
infiltrate of predominantly macrophages."" Histopathologic findings in the eye include
granulomatous panuveitis and retinitis, and degenerative changes of the optic nerve and
tract may occur.P'" Results of direct and indirect immunofluorescence testing are usually
negative."
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Patients with poorly controlled uveitis often experience posterior synechiae with secondary
glaucoma, cataracts, and vision loss. Thus, aggressive early treatment is essential. Topical
or subconjunctival glucocorticoids and topical cycloplegics (e.g., atropine) are beneficial in
patients with anterior uveitis. Systemic glucocorticoids and azathioprine are needed to
combat posterior uveitis and dermatologic signs.359, 363 Topical cyclosporine was useful in

758 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-65. Canine uveodermatologic syndrome. Lichenoid interface dermatitis.

one dog.361 If the disease is treated early, variable degrees of cutaneous repigmentation
(sometimes complete) usually occur. 355. 361 Occasionally, these cases may respond to systemic glucocorticoids alone, but because blindness may result from delaying an effective
therapy and because more aggressive therapy is often required, we recommend combination immunosuppressive therapy.361

FIGURE 9-66. Close-up of Figure 9-65. Numerous histiocytes in lichenoid band.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 759

Dogs usually require long-term alternate-morning oral glucocorticoid therapy (e.g.,
0.25 to 1.1 mglkg prednisone or prednisolone) to prevent recurrence.P" We have seen
some very good responses with the combination of tetracycline and niacinamide (see
Chap. 3). This drug combination has allowed marked reduction in or discontinuation of
systemic glucocorticoid therapy. The response of the skin lesions should not be used to
assess response to therapy because uveitis may be active while the skin is improving.P"
Ophthalmic examinations should be periodically performed even when the cutaneous
changes are in remission.

Auricular Chondritis
Auricular chondritis ("relapsing polychondritis") is a rare disease of cats and dogs characterized by inflammation and destruction of auricular cartilage. 18. 53. 368. 369 In humans, a
somewhat similar condition is called relapsing polychondritis .18 However, in cats, only the
auricular cartilage is affected, and the condition has not been reported to have a relapsing
nature. Hence, in cats, the term relapsing polychondritis is presently inappropriate.v"

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Relapsing polychondritis is often classified among the immune-mediated diseases because
of similarities to rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythematosus as well as its favorable
response to immunomodulatory therapy. In humans, antibodies against Type II collagen
may be demonstrated in some cases." In one dog, a definitive cause was not determined,
though chronic otitis preceded the development of the auricular chondritis.P"

CLINICAL FEATURES
Affected cats and the one dog presented with a history of swollen, erythematous, painful
ears. 54• 366-368 When examined, the pinnae are swollen and meaty, erythematous to violaceous, and curled and deformed (see Fig. 9-56G and H; Fig. 9-67). Typically, both
pinnae are affected, although one may be more severely affected than the other, or the
condition may be initially unilateral, then bilateral.P" Cats may be otherwise healthy or
may show signs of pyrexia, lethargy, and anorexia. In cats, no age (1 to 14 years), sex, or
breed predilections are evident.P'" The dog had a history of nonerosive polyarthritis and
laxity of digital and carpal joints as well as otitis prior to the development of auricular
chondritis.

FIGURE 9-67. Auricular chondritis
in a dog with suspect polychondritis.

760 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

DIAGNOSIS
Biopsies reveal lymphoplasmacytic inflammation, loss of cartilage basophilia, and cartilage
necrosis (Fig. 9_68).47.365 Hematologic examinations may demonstrate variable degrees of
neutrophilia, lymphocytosis, and hyperglobulinemia.?" One cat was positive for ANA but
also had concurrent FIV infection.P" Direct immunofluorescence testing was negative in
two cats.F!

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Cats that are in no pain and show no systemic signs may do fine without therapy.
Systemic glucocorticoids were ineffective in eight cats. 371, 375 Dapsone (1 mglkg q24h)
induced a remission in four cats, and no relapse occurred when therapy was
stopped. 365,368 Permanent deformity of the pinnae is to be expected, whether or not the
cat is treated. Surgical excision was effective in eliminating the discomfort and gross
lesions in the one dog. 365

Immunoproliferative Enteropathy of Basenji Dogs
Immunoproliferative enteropathy of Basenjis is characterized by chronic intractable diarrhea, progressive emaciation, and gastropathy.47. 370 An autosomal recessive inheritance of
the condition has been hypothesized. A similar disease exists in humans.
Basenjis of either sex and a wide age range are affected. Skin lesions are variable and
may consist of alopecia, hyperpigmentation, hyperkeratosis, and marginal necrosis and
ulceration of the pinnae or a symmetric alopecia of the ventrum. The haircoat is often dry
and dull.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and laboratory testing. Most
affected dogs have hypergammaglobulinemia. Some dogs are hypothyroid. Intestinal biopsy reveals lymphoplasmacytic enteritis.
Dermatohistopathologic findings are nondiagnostic. Alopecic skin is characterized by
endocrinopathic changes, probably reflecting hypothyroidism, Dermatitic pinnae are characterized by ulcerative perivascular dermatitis, necrosis, and changes consistent with secondary bacterial infection. Although the clinical appearance of the pinnae is suggestive of
a vasculopathy, histologic evidence of vessel disease has not been reported.

FIGURE 9-68. Feline auricular chondritis. Inflammation and necrosis of ear cartilage.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 761

Therapy is provided according to symptoms and is often disappointing. Genetic counseling, avoidance of stress, and high-quality commercial diets are indicated. Systemic
glucocorticoids may be beneficial.

Alopecia Areata
Alopecia areata is an uncommon disorder of dogs and cats characterized by patches of
nonscarring hair loss that grossly is noninflammatory.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Alopecia areata is of complex pathogenesis with immunologic targeting of anagen hair
follicles and the relatively consistent finding of antifollicular autoantibodies (IgG class) as
well as CD4+ and CD8+ cells in the affected follicles in humans.F" T lymphocytes and
antifollicular antibodies have also been documented in the dog. 374 In dogs, autoantibodies
are directed against trichohyalin, inner root sheath, and hair matrix antigens. 373. 375. 376 This
is different from the findings in humans and mice, wherein the outer root sheath and hair
matrix are most often targeted.F" CD4+ and CD8+ perifollicular lymphocytes and af3,
CD8+ intrabulbar T cells have been described in dogs. 373. 374 In addition, many CD1 +
dendritic antigen-presenting cells are present in the perifollicular dermis.F"
Other observations in humans supporting the immunologic basis are (1) accumulations
of lymphoid cells (helper T cells) around hair bulbs during the active phase of the disease,
(2) occasional association of alopecia areata with other immune-mediated diseases, (3)
increased incidence of various autoantibodies in alopecia areata, (4) decreased numbers of
circulating T cells, (5) abnormal presence of Langerhans' cells in the follicular bulb, (6)
increased expression of class I and II MHC antigens (7) the deposition of C3 or IgG and
IgM or both at the basement membrane zone of the hair follicles in lesional and normal
scalp as revealed by direct immunofluorescence testing, and (8) the therapeutic benefit of
inducing delayed-type hypersensitivity and immunosuppressive therapies. In addition, genetic, endocrine, and psychological factors have been thought to play a role in humans
with alopecia areata.l" 373 Morphologic abnormalities of melanocytes in follicular bulbs
have been described in humans with alopecia areata. Cytokines IL-1a, IL-1f3, and TNF-a
are potent inhibitors of hair follicle growth and in vitro produce changes in hair follicle
morphology similar to those in alopecia areata. 372a

CLINICAL FEATURES
In dogs and cats, alopecia areata is characterized by focal or multifocal patches of
asymptomatic, noninflammatory alopecia.P: 47. 373 There are no apparent age or sex predilections. Though few cases have been reported, the Dachshund may be over-represented."? The alopecic areas are well circumscribed, and the exposed skin appears normal
(Fig. 9-69). Chronically alopecic areas may become variably hyperpigmented.
Lesions may occur anywhere, especially the head, neck, and trunk. Lesions may be
solitary or numerous and may be asymmetric or symmetric. Rarely, alopecia progresses to
involve the majority of the body (Fig. 9-70). Hair growth may occur spontaneously, with
the initially regrown hair being white, only to later be replaced by pigmented hair (Fig.
9_71).373 Microscopic examination of hairs plucked from the margin of enlarging lesions
reveals a mixture of normal telogen, dysplastic, and "exclamation point" hairs-short,
stubby hairs with frayed, fractured, pigmented distal ends whose shafts undulate or taper
toward the proximal end (Fig. 9-72). Occasionally, alopecia areata may be confined to the
dark-haired areas of multicolored haircoats (Fig. 9-73). Claw changes compatible with
trachyonychia (roughening, ridging, vertical striations) were seen in one dog and were
compared to those occasionally occurring in humans with alopecia areata.?"

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes traction alopecia, injection reactions, acquired pattern
alopecia, topical steroid reaction, follicular dysplasia, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, staphy-

762 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-69. Canine alopecia
areata. Well-circumscribed annular
alopecia over hip region.

lococcal folliculitis, pseudopelade, psychogenic alopecia, and endocrinopathies. Definitive
diagnosis is based on the insidious onset of asymptomatic, well-circumscribed areas of
noninflammatory alopecia and on skin biopsy.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
The characteristic early histopathologic findings include a peribulbar accumulation of
lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells.22 • 71 This has been described as looking like a
"swarm of bees" (Fig. 9-74). This early change may be difficult to demonstrate, and
specimens may only show a few inflammatory cells with apoptosis of bulbar keratinocytes.
Finding helpful diagnostic lesions is aided by performing multiple biopsies from the
advancing edges of early lesions. Later, the histopathologic findings consist of a predominance of catagen and telogen hair follicles as well as follicular atrophy. Hair follicles may
be distorted in contour, with follicular and hair shaft dysplasia and peribulbar pigmentary
incontinence. Chronic lesions may show complete absence of hair follicles and a fibrous
tract associated with orphaned epitrichial sweat and sebaceous glands and arrector pili

FIGURE 9- 70. Dachshund with
generalized alopecia areata.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 763

FIGURE 9-71. Leukotrichia of
the hair regrowth with spontaneous
resolution of alopecia areata in a
Rottweiler.

muscles. As in humans.F? eosinophils may be found in the peribulbar infiltrate and within
the fibrous tracts of dogs with alopecia areata.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for alopecia areata in humans is usually good; most patients recover
completely within 3 to 5 years with or without therapy. Although topical, intralesional, or
systemic glucocorticoids are often recommended for the treatment of alopecia areata in
humans, dogs, and cats, there is only anecdotal evidence that they are beneficial.l" 47, 373
The biological behavior of alopecia areata in dogs and cats is unclear. Most dogs and cats
with one or a few lesions spontaneously recover after a course of 6 months to 2 years."
Initial hair regrowth is often a color lighter than normal (leukotrichia).
A variety of immunomodulatory therapies have been used in humans and mice,
including corticosteroids, contact sensitizers, cyclosporine, minoxidil, and UV exposure
with or without concurrent psoralen therapy.l" 372a, 373

FIGURE 9-72. Canine alopecia
areata, Trichogram may reveal hair
shafts with suddenly tapered ends ("exclamation points").

764 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-73. Alopecia areata in a
Dachshund. Alopecia of pinnae and around
eyes. The black hairs were lost, but the tan
hairs on the muzzle and eyebrows were retained.

FIGURE 9-74. Canine alopecia areata. Peribulbar accumulations of lymphocytes C'swarm of bees")
(arrows).

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 765

Pseudopelade

Pseudopelade is a rare disorder of dogs and cats characterized by alopecia that grossly is
noninflammatory.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Pseudopelade appears to have an immune-mediated pathogenesis. Immunologic studies
conducted on skin biopsies from two dogs377 and one cat 378 have shown a predominance
of af3, CD8+ lymphocytes within the epithelium of the hair follicle isthmus. The perifollicular dermis was rich in CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes as well as CDI + dendritic
antigen-presenting cells. Circulating autoantibodies (IgG class) against multiple lower hair
follicle proteins (including hair keratins) and trichohyalin were demonstrated in four dogs,
but not in the cat.
CLINICAL FEATURES

Pseudopelade has been described in 1- to 11-year-old dogs with no apparent breed or sex
predilections.P" Lesions have been characterized by well-circumscribed, noninflammatory
areas of alopecia, which varied from 2 to 8 em in diameter in one or more body areas to a
diffuse alopecia sparing only the head and neck. Some lesions were scaly and/or hyperpigmented. Pruritus and constitutional signs were absent.
Cats present with more-or-less symmetric, noninflammatory alopecia that may begin
on the face (Fig. 9-75), then spread to the ventrum, legs, and paws (Fig. 9_76).378, 379
Onychomadesis has been a constant finding (see Fig. 9-76).
DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis is as described for alopecia areata. Definitive diagnosis is based
on skin biopsy. Histopathologically, the differential diagnosis includes those entities characterized by lymphocytic mural folliculitis (see Chap. 11).

FIGURE 9-75. Pseudopelade in a cat. Moreor-less symmetric hair loss on the face,

766 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-76. Same cat as in Figure 9-75.
Alopecia of front legs. Note all claws have
sloughed.

HISTOPATHOLOGY
The characteristic early histopathologic findings include a variably severe accumulation of
lymphocytes, histiocytes, and fewer plasma cells that is most intense at the follicular
isthmus (Fig. 9_77).377,378 In cats, small numbers of neutrophils and eosinophils may also
be present, In early lesions, inflammation is marked, atrophic changes are mild to absent,
and sebaceous glands are present. In late lesions, atrophic changes are severe, inflammation is mild, and sebaceous glands are often absent,
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
This condition has failed to respond to topical and systemic glucocorticoids as well as
chlorambucil.F" 379 In cats, anecdotal reports indicate that cyclosporine may be effective. 379 Spontaneous remission has not been reported,

Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a generic term that signifies the abnormal extracellular deposition of one of
a family of unrelated proteins that share certain characteristic staining properties and
ultrastructural features.P 18, 381, 389 Amyloidosis is not a single disease entity, and amyloid
may accumulate as a result of a variety of different pathogenetic mechanisms. In the dog
and cat, most cases of amyloidosis are related to deposition of immunoglobulin light
chains,22, 25, 386
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Different amino acid compositions of amyloid may occur. 385 , 389 Amyloid deposits contain a
nonfibrillar protein called amyloid-P, which is identical to a normal circulating plasma
globulin known as serum amyloid-P (an elastase inhibitor that may help protect amyloid
deposits from degradation and phagocytosis), Primary and myeloma-associated systemic
amyloidosis have immunoglobulin light chains (mostly the lambda type) as precursors to
the amyloid fibril protein, which is called amyloid-L. In secondary systemic amyloidosis

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 767

FIGURE 9-77. Same cat as in Figures 9- 75
and 9-76. Note murallyrnphocytic folliculitis.

(associated with chronic inflammation), a serum precursor protein, serum amyloid-A (a
high-density lipoprotein and acute-phase reactant), forms the fibrils in the amyloid deposits. Serum amyloid-A is thought to be cleaved proteolytically by macrophages to amyloid-A
and excreted extracellularly.
Although the pathogenesis of amyloidosis is unclear, it is morphologically related to
cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system, plasma cells, and keratinocytes. Functional
studies suggest that such cells play at least a partial role in the genesis of amyloidosis.
Ultimately, amyloid deposits lead to changes in tissue architecture and function. In dogs
and cats, amyloidosis is usually associated with chronic inflammatory disease, neoplasia,
and accumulations of plasma cells. 22, 25, 381, 386 It has also been associated with a vasculitic
syndrome.P" It has also been suggested that vaccination reactions caused polyarthritis in
12 Akitas, 33% of which progressed to renal amyloidosis.i'" A familial tendency has
been detected in Chinese Shar pei and beagle dogs and in Abyssinian and Siamese
cats.381. 382. 385, 387

CLINICAL FEATURES
Most commonly, amyloidosis is an internal disease, usually affecting the kidneys, spleen,
and liver, with death often resulting from the renal involvement. 25, 381 Cutaneous lesions
are described in dogs with systemic amyloidosis and primary cutaneous disease.P Cutane-

768 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

FIGURE 9-78. Canine cutaneous
amyloidosis. Ecchymoses produced
by traumatizing the skin (pinch purpura) (arrows). (Courtesy R. M.
Schwartzman.)

ous lesions with systemic amyloidosis associated with a monoclonal gammopathy was
reported in an adult female Cocker spaniel,388 Cutaneous hemorrhage could be induced
by flicking the abdominal skin briskly with a finger or by removing hair (Fig. 9-78). If the
skin was traumatized severely, blood oozed through the skin within seconds and clotted
immediately. Skin biopsy revealed an amorphous, homogeneous, eosinophilic superficial
dermis. The walls of the blood vessels in the involved area were thickened by deposition
of the homogeneous eosinophilic material (Fig. 9-79). The material was Congo redpositive (congophilia), and a green birefringence of the material was visible in Congo redstained sections examined with polarized light (dichroism). A monoclonal serum IgG
paraprotein was found. No treatment was given, and the dog remained unchanged for 14
months.
Mucocutaneous amyloidosis unassociated with monoclonal gammopathy was reported
in a 3-year-old Brittany spaniel."? The dog had multiple, whitish to ulcerated papular and
plaquelike lesions on the tongue and gingiva as well as oozing ulcers on the footpads,
ventral surface of the interdigital spaces, and multiple pressure points (elbows, stifles).

FIGURE 9-79. Canine cutaneous
amyloidosis. Dermal blood vessel
wall is markedly thickened by amyloid deposition (arrow). (Courtesy
R. M. Schwartzman.)

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 769
A case of generalized amyloidosis was described in a lO-week-old German shepherd
puppy.384 It presented with swollen erythematous pads and reluctance to walk. Though
amyloidosis was found at necropsy, the pads only showed chronic exudative inflammation.
Primary nodular cutaneous amyloidosis has been described as the most common type
of cutaneous amyloidosis in dogs and cats. 22 Solitary or grouped dermal or subcutaneous
nodules may occur anywhere but more commonly involve the ear. Some nodules may
ulcerate secondary to necrosis. In humans, nodular amyloidosis is considered to be a
plasmacytoma that locally produces immunoglobulin light chains as precursors to amyloid
fibrils. 386, 389 This may be the case in dogs as well. The differential diagnosis for these
lesions would be neoplasia, cysts, and infectious or sterile nodular granulomas. Diagnosis
is made by histopathologic examination, which shows multiple dermal accumulations of
amorphous eosinophilic material. Small numbers of plasma cells are found, as well as
macrophages and small numbers of lymphocytes.

DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of amyloidosis is confirmed by biopsy.22 Light-microscopic examination
reveals the deposition of an eosinophilic amorphous substance that is congophilic and
birefringent when polarized (Fig. 9_80).389 Secondary-but not primary and myelomaassociated-amyloid loses its congophilia after pretreatment with potassium permanganate. Electron-microscopic examination reveals the characteristic presence of 7.5- to 10nm-wide linear, nonbranching tubular fibrils, each fibril being composed of several
filaments arranged in a ,B-pleated sheet configuration.P?

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Solitary nodules un associated with systemic disease can be successfully excised. Successful
treatment of multiple lesions is not reported. In humans, skin lesions of both primary and
myeloma-associated amyloidosis have responded to DMSO, which may inhibit amyloid
synthesis or act to promote amyloid degradation.P"

FIGURE 9-80. Canine cutaneous amyloidosis. Multiple "lakes" of homogeneous, fractured
amyloid.

770 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

• REFERENCES
General
1. Abdou NI: The idiotype-anti-idiotype network in human autoimmunity. J Clin Immunol 5:365, 1985.
2. Affolter VK, et al: Immunohistochemical characterization of canine acute graft-versus-host disease and
erythema multiforme. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 103.
3. Ahmed SA, et al: Sex hormones, immune responses,
and autoimmune diseases. Am J Pathol 121:531,
1985.
4. Ansel J, et al: Cytokine modulation of keratinocyte
cytokines. J Invest Dermatol 94:IOIS, 1990.
5. Beutner EH, et al: Immunopathology of the Skin III.
Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1987.
6. Bos JD: Skin Immune System. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1989.
7. Bradley GA, Calderwood Mays MB: Immunoperoxidase staining for the detection of autoantibodies in
canine autoimmune skin disease: Comparison to immunofluorescence results. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 26:105, 1990.
8. Braquet P, et al: Perspectives in platelet-activating
factor research. Pharmacol Rev 39:97, 1987.
9. Brunner CJ: Autoimmunity. In: Bonagura JD (ed):
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995, p 554.
10. Caciolo PL, et al: Michel's medium as a preservative
for immunofluorescent staining of cutaneous biopsy
specimens in dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res 45:128,
1984.
11. Carlotti DN, et al: Drug-related superficial pemphigus in the dog: A report of 3 cases. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet Dermatol
15:23, 1999.
12. Dahl MV: Immunodermatology II. Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1988.
13. Day MJ, Mazza G: Tissue immunoglobulin G subclasses observed in immune-mediated dermatopathy,
deep pyoderma, and hypersensitivity dermatitis in
dogs. Res Vet Sci 58:82, 1995.
14. DeBoer DJ, et al: Circulating immune complex concentrations in selected cases of skin disease in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 49:143, 1988.
15. Dore M, et al: Production of a monoclonal antibody
against canine GMP-140 (P-selectin) and studies of its
vascular distribution in canine tissues. Vet Pathol 30:
213, 1993.
16. Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1995.
17. Fadok VA: TGF,B: The janus of cytokines. J Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:129, 1997.
18. Freedberg 1M: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
19. Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz WS: Direct immunofluorescence testing: A comparison of two laboratories in the
diagnosis of canine immune-mediated skin disease.
Semin Vet Med Surg 2:202, 1987.
20. Griffin CEo Diagnosis and management of primary
autoimmune skin disease: A review. Semin Vet Med
Surg 2:173, 1987.
21. Griffin CE, et al: Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
22. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A

Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
and Feline Skin Disease. Mosby-Year Book, St.
Louis, 1992.
23. Haines DM, et al: Avidin-biotin peroxidase complex
immunohistochemistry to detect immunoglobulin in
formalin fixed skin biopsies in canine autoimmune
skin disease. Can J Vet Res 51:104, 1987.
24. Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
1998.
25. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
26. Hargis AM, Liggit HD: Cytokines and their role in
cutaneous injury. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds). Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p 325.
27. Hauser C, et al: T helper cells grown with haptenmodified cultured Langerhans' cells produce interleukin 4 and stimulate IgE production by B cells. Eur J
Immunol 19:245, 1989.
28. Hauser C, Orbea HA: Superantigens and their role in
immune-mediated diseases. J Invest Dermatol 101:
503, 1993.
29. Henfry JI: Autoimmune skin disease in dogs. In Pract
13:131, 1991.
30. Hewicker-Trautwein M, et al: Zur diagnostic bulloser
und nicht-bulloser autoimmuner Hautkrankheiten bei
Hund und Katze. Kleintierpraxis 37:135, 1992.
31. Ihrke PJ, et al: The longevity of immunoglobulin
preservation in canine skin utilizing Michel's fixative.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 9:161, 1985.
32. Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993.
33. Kalaher KM: The value of immunofluorescence testing. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 503.
34. Kristensen F, Mehl NB: Autoimmune lidelser hos
hund og kat: Behandling med guldsalte. Dansk Vet
Tidsskr 72:883, 1989.
35. Kromer G, et al: Is autoimmunity a side effect of
interleukin 2 production? Immunol Today 7:199,
1986.
36. Kummel BA: Medical treatment of canine pemphigus-pemphigoid. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995, p 636.
37. Lewis RM, Picut CA: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989.
38. Locke PH, et al: Manual of Small Animal Dermatology. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Shurdington, 1993.
39. Luger TA, Schwartz T: Evidence for an epidermal
cytokine network. J Invest Dermatol 95:100S, 1990.
40. Matus RW, et al: Plasmapheresis in 5 dogs with systemic immune-mediated disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:595, 1985.
41. McEwan BJ, et al: The response of the eosinophil in
acute inflammation in the horse. In: von Tschamer C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 176.
42. McKenzie RC, Saunder DN: The role of keratinocyte
cytokines in inflammation and immunity. J Invest
Dermatol 95:105S, 1990.
43. Middleton E, et al: Allergy Principles and Practice
IV. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 77'
44. Moore FM, et al: Localization of immunoglobulins
and complement by the peroxidase antiperoxidase
method in autoimmune and nonautoimmune canine
dermatopathies. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 14:1,
1987.
45. Morrison LH: When to request immunofluorescence:
Practical hints. Semin Cutan Med Surg 18:36, 1999.
46. Mottier S, von Tschamer C: Immunohistochemistry
in skin disease: diagnostic value? In: von Tschamer C,
Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, London, 1990, p 479.
47. Scott OW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1995.
48. Nickoloff BJ: Dermal Immune System. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, 1993.
49. Noli C, et al: A retrospective evaluation of adverse
reaction of trimethoprim-sulfonamide combinations in
dogs and cats. Vet Q 17:123, 1995.
50. Noli C, et al: Apoptosis in selected skin diseases. Vet
Dermatol 9:221, 1998.
51. Olivry T, et al: Heterogeneity of canine autoimmune
subepidermal bullous diseases: Identification of targeted antigens defines novel clinicopathologic entities.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coil Vet Dermatol 13:80, 1997.
52. Medleau L, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfonamide-associated drug eruptions in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
26:305, 1990.
53. Scott OW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
54. Scott OW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
55. Scott OW, et aI: Immune-mediated dermatoses in
domestic animals: Ten years after. Part I. Compend
Cont Educ Small Anim Pract 9:423, 1987.
56. Scott OW, et aI: Immune-mediated dermatoses in
domestic animals: Ten years after. Part II. Compend
Cont Educ Small Anim Pract 9:539, 1987.
57. von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990.
58. Stone J: Dermatology, Immunology, and Allergy.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1985.
59. Suter MM, et aI: Autoimmune diseases of domestic
animals: An update. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 321.
60. Swerlick RA, Lawley TJ: Role of microvascular endothelial cells in inflammation. J Invest Dermatol 100:
ins, 1993.
61. Tillers BH, Dobson RL: Pathogenesis of Skin Disease. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1986.
62. Thomsen MK: Species specificity in the generation of
eicosanoids: Emphasis on leukocyte-activating factors
in the skin of allergic dogs and humans. In: Ihrke PJ,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 63.
63. Thomsen MK: The Role of Neutrophil-Activating
Mediators in Canine Health and Disease. Ballerup,
Copenhagen, 1991.
64. Thompson JP: Basic immunologic principles of allergic disease. Semin Vet Med Surg 6:247, 1991.
65. Tizard lR: Veterinary Immunology: An Introduction
V. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1996.
66. van den Broek, A: Autoimmune skin diseases in cats.
In Pract 13:175, 1991.

67. Day MJ: A Color Atlas of Clinical Immunology of the
Dog and Cat. Iowa State University Press, Ames, lA,
1999.
68. Walsh LJ, Murphy GF: Role of adhesion molecules in
cutaneous inflammation and neoplasia. J Cutan Pathol
19:161, 1992.
69. Wolfe JH, Halliwell REW: Total hemolytic complement values in normal and diseased dog populations.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1:287, 1980.
70. Yager JA: The skin as an immune organ. In: Ihrke PJ,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II.
Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 3.
71. Yager JA, Scott OW: The skin and appendages. In:
Jubb KVF, et aI (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals IV. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p 531.
72. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathology of the Dog and Cat: Dermatopathology
and Skin Tumors. Wolfe Publishing, London, 1994.
73. Zipfel W, et aI: Demonstration of immunoglobulins
and complement in canine and feline autoimmune
and nonautoimmune skin diseases with the direct immunofluorescence and indirect immunoperoxidase
method. J Vet Med A 32:494, 1992.

Therapy
74. Miller E: The use of cytotoxic agents in the treatment
of immune-mediated diseases of dogs and cats. Semin
Vet Med Surg 12:157, 1997.
75. Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook III. Iowa
State University Press, Ames, 1999.
76. Pedersen NC: A review of immunologic diseases of
the dog. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:251, 1999.
77. Rosenkrantz W: Immunomodulating drugs in dermatology. In: Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 570.
78. Rosenkrantz WS: Pemphigus foliaceus. In: Griffin
CE, et aI (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby- Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 141.
79. White SO, et al: Corticosteroid (methylprednisolone
sodium succinate) pulse therapy in 5 dogs with autoimmune skin disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1121,
1987.
80. White SO: Nonsteroidal immunosuppressive therapy.
In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999,
p 536.

Alkylating Agents (Cyclophosphamide, ChlorambUcil)
81. Rhodes KH, Shoulberg N: Chlorambucil: Effective
therapeutic option for the treatment of feline immune-mediated dermatoses. Feline Pract 20:5, 1992.
82. Stanton ME, Legendre AM: Effects of cyclophosphamide in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:
1319, 1986.

Azathioprine
83. Beale KM: Azathioprine toxicity in the domestic cat.
In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere, London, 1990,
p 457.
84. Beale KM: Azathioprine for treatment of immunemediated diseases of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 53:1236, 1992.
85. Griffin CE: Pemphigus foliaceus: Recent findings on
the pathophysiology and results of treatment. Proceedings of the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
1993, p 85.
86. Moriello KA, et al: Acute pancreatitis in two dogs
given azathioprine and prednisone. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 191:695, 1987.

772 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
87. White SD, et al: Investigation into the role of thiopurine methyltransferase in the use of azathioprine in
dogs: Phase one. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet DermatoI14:111, 1998.

Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p
606.
109. Wozel G, Barth J: Current aspects of modes of action
of dapsone. Int J Dermatol 27:547, 1988.

Cyclosporine

Tetracycline/Niacinamide

88. Page EH, et al: Cyclosporine A. J Am Acad Dermatol
14:785, 1986.
89. Read RA: Treatment of canine nictitans plasmacytic
conjunctivitis with 0.2% cyclosporine ointment. J
Small Anim Pract 36:50, 1995.
90. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Clinical evaluation of cyclosporine in animal models with cutaneous immunemediated disease and epitheliotropic lymphoma. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 25:377, 1989.
91. White JV: Cyclosporine: Prototype of a T-cell selective immunosuppressant. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:
566, 1986.
92. Williams DL: A comparative approach to topical cyclosporine therapy. Eye 11:453, 1997.

110. Humbert P, et al: The tetracyclines in dermatology. J
Am Acad Dermatol 25:691, 1991.
111. Rosenkrantz WS: Discoid lupus erythematosus. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 149.
112. White SD, et al: Use of tetracycline and niacinamide
for treatment of autoimmune skin disease in 31 dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1497, 1992.

Antimalarials
113. Isaacson D, et al: Antimalarials in dermatology. Int J
Dermatol 21:379, 1982.
114. Tannenbaum L, Tuffanelli DL: Antimalarial agents.
Arch Dermatol 116:587, 1980.

Gold Therapy

Colchicine

93. Fadok VA: Thrombocytopenia and hemorrhage associated with gold salt therapy for bullous pemphigoid in
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:261, 1982.
94. Kummel B: Treatment of autoimmune disease.
Derm Dialogue 4:2, 1985.
95. Medleau L, et al: Ulcerative pododermatitis in a cat:
Immunofluorescent findings and response to chrysotherapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:449, 1982.
96. Muller GH, et al (eds): Small Animal Dermatology
IV. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
97. Scott DW: Chrysotherapy (gold therapy). In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VIII. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1983, p 448.
98. Sfikakis PP, et al: Suppression of IL-2 and IL-2 receptor biosynthesis by gold compounds in in vitro
activated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
Arth Rheumatol 35:208, 1993.
99. Suzuki S, et al: Gold sodium thiomalate selectively
inhibits IL-5 mediated eosinophil survival. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 96:251, 1995.
100. Thomas I: Gold therapy and its indications in dermatology. J Am Acad Dermatol 16:845, 1987.
101. White S: Oral gold therapy. Derm Dialogue 5:2,
1986.

115. Guilhan J, Orr J: Essais de traitement de l'eczema
des carnivores domestiques par Ie colchicoside. Bull
Acad Vet France 30:29, 1957.
116. Sullivan TP, et al: Colchicine in dermatology. J Am
Acad Dermatol 39:993, 1998.

Sul(ones/Sul(onamides
102. Fadok VA, Barrie J: Sulfasalazine-responsive vasculitis
in the dog: A case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:
161, 1984.
103. Halliwell REW, et al: Dapsone for the treatment of
pruritic dermatitis (dermatitis herpetiformis and subcorneal pustular dermatosis) in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 170:698, 1977.
104. Hekman P, et al: Pharmacokinetics and bioavailabiltty
of dapsone in the beagle dog. J Small Anim Pract 30:
92, 1989.
105. Katz SI: Sulfones. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 2790.
106. Lees GE, et al: Fatal thrombocytopenic hemorrhagic
diathesis associated with dapsone administration to a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:49, 1979.
107. Thuong-Nguyen V, et al: Inhibition of neutrophil adherence to antibody by dapsone: A possible therapeutic mechanism of dapsone in the treatment of IgA
dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 100:349, 1993.
108. Scott DW: Sulfones and sulfonamides in canine dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary

Pemphigus Complex
117. Amagai M, et al: The clinical phenotype of pemphigus is defined by the antidesmoglein autoantibody
profile. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:167, 1999.
118. Anhalt GJ: Making sense of antigens and antibodies
in pemphigus. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:763, 1999.
119. August JR, Chickering WR: Pemphigus foliaceus
causing lameness in 4 dogs. Compend Cont Educ
Small Anim Pract 7:894, 1985.
120. Bensignor E, et al: Le pemphigus foliace des carnivores domestiques. Ann Med Vet 142:5, 1998.
121. Caciolo PL, et al: Pemphigus foliaceus in 8 cats and
results of induction therapy using azathioprine. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 20:571, 1984.
122. Carlotti DN, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris in the dog: A
report of 8 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 15:21, 1999.
123. Carlotti DN, et al: Concurrent superficial pemphigus
and multifocal cutaneous metastatic mammary carcinoma in a dog: A paraneoplastic disease? Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 15:75, 1999.
124. Crameri FM, Suter MM: Induction of acantholysis in
a serum-free culture system. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet DermatoI1O:63,
1994.
125. deBruin A, et al: Periplakin and envoplakin are target
antigens in canine and human paraneoplastic pemphigus. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:682, 1999.
125a. Ding X, et aI: The anti-desmoglein 1 autoantibodies
in pemphigus vulgaris sera are pathogenic. J Invest
Dermatol 112:739, 1999.
126. Dmochowski M, et aI: Desmocollins I and II are
recognized by certain sera from patients with various
types of pemphigus, particularly Brazilian pemphigus
foliaceus. J Invest Dermatol 100:380, 1993.
127. Dunstan RW: Controversies in immunologic diseases
from a pathologist's perspective. Controversies in Veterinary Dermatology. Bad Kreuznach, 1992.
128. Fukuda E, et aI: Pemphigus erythematosus in a Shetland sheepdog. J Vet Med (Tokyo) 51:24, 1998.
129. Greek JS: Feline pemphigus foliaceus: A retrospective

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 773
of 23 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am ColI Vet Dermatol 9:27, 1993.
130. Griffin CE: Controversies in immunologic diseases
from a clinician's standpoint. Controversies in Veterinary Dermatology. Bad Kreuznach, 1992.
131. Griffin CE: Pemphigus foliaceus: Recent findings on
the pathophysiology and results of treatment. Presentation, William Dick Bicentenary, Edinburgh, 1993.
132. Griffin CE: Recognizing and treating pemphigus foliaceus in cats. Vet Med 86:513, 1991.
133. Halliwell REW, Goldschmidt M: Pemphigus foliaceus
in the canine: A case report and discussion. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 13:431, 1977.
134. Ihrke PJ, et al: Pemphigus foliaceus of the footpads
in 3 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:67, 1985.
135. Ihrke PJ, et al: Pemphigus foliaceus in dogs: A review
of 37 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:59, 1985.
136. loannides D, et al: Regional variation in the expression of pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, and pemphigus vulgaris antigens in human skin. J
Invest Dermatol 96:15, 1991.
137. Ischii K, et al: Characterization of autoantibodies in
pemphigus using antigen-specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays with baculovirus-expressed recombinant desmogleins. J ImmunoI159:20l0, 1997
138. Iwasaki T, et al: The detection of the autoantigen
targeted by patient sera from dogs with pemphigus
foliaceus. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet DermatoI12:44, 1996.
139. Iwasaki T, Maeda Y: The effect of ultraviolet (UV) on
the severity of canine pemphigus erythematosus. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI
Vet DermatoI13:86, 1997.
140. Iwasaki T, et al: Effect of substrate on indirect immunofluorescence test for canine pemphigus foliaceus.
Vet Pathol 33:332, 1996.
141. Iwatsuki K, et al: Ultrastructural binding site of pemphigus foliaceus antibodies: Comparison with pemphigus vulgaris. J Cutan Pathol 18:160, 1991.
142. Koch PJ, et al: Targeted disruption of the pemphigus
vulgaris antigen (desmoglein 3) gene in mice causes
loss of keratinocyte cell adhesion with a phenotype
similar to pemphigus vulgaris. J Cell BioI 137:1091,
1997.
143. Lemmens P, et al: Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a
dog. Vet Dermatol 9:127, 1998.
144. Liang L, et al: The phosphodiesterase inhibitors pentoxiphylline and rolipram prevent diabetes in NOD
mice. Diabetes 47:570, 1998.
145. Lombardi C, et al: Environmental risk factors in endemic pemphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem). J Invest
Dermatol 18:847, 1992.
146. Mahoney MG, et al: Explanation for the clinical and
microscopic localization of lesions in pemphigus foliaceus and vulgaris. J Clin Invest 103:461, 1999.
147. Manning TO, et al: Pemphigus diseases in the feline:
Seven case reports and discussion. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 18:433, 1982.
148. Nguyen T, et al: The pathophysiological significance
of nondesmoglein targets of pemphigus autoimmunity. Arch Dermatol 134:971, 1998.
149. Mattise AW: Canine pemphigus vegetans: A report of
16 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet Dermatol 7:28, 1991.
150. Noxon JO, Myers RK: Pemphigus foliaceus in two
Shetland sheepdog littermates. J Am Vet Med Assoc
194:545, 1989.
151. Olivry T, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris lacking mucosal

involvement in a German shepherd dog: Possible response to heparin. Vet Dermatol 3:79, 1992.
152. Pascal A, et al: Seasonality and environmental risk
factors for pemphigus foliaceus in animals: A retrospective study of 83 cases presented to the veterinary
medical teaching hospital, University of California,
Davis from 1976 to 1994. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet Dermatolll:24,
1995.
153. Poisson L, et al: Subcorneal neutrophilic acantholytic
pustular dermatitis: An unusual manifestation of dermatophytosis resembling canine pemphigus foliaceous.
In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 456.
153a. Reis VMS, et al: UVB-induced acantholysis in endemic pemphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem) and pemphigus vulgaris. J Am Acad Dermatol 42:571, 2000.
154. Rhodes KH, Shoulberg N: Chlorambucil: Effective
therapeutic options for the treatment of feline immune-mediated dermatoses. Feline Pract 20:5, 1992.
155. Robinson ND, et al: The new pemphigus variants. J
Am Acad Dermatol 40:649, 1999.
156. Rosenkrantz WS: Pemphigus foliaceus. In: Griffin
CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 141.
157. Ruocco V, Sacerdoti G: Pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid due to drugs. Int J DermatoI30:307, 1991.
158. Ruocco V, et al: A case of diet-related pemphigus.
Dermatology 192:373, 1996.
159. Schoen H, et al: Immunophoresis in paraneoplastic
pemphigus. Arch Dermatol 134:706, 1998.
160. Scott DW: Pemphigus vegetans in a dog. Cornell Vet
67:374, 1977.
161. Scott DW, et al: Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog
and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:815, 1980.
162. Scott DW, et al: Pemphigus vulgaris without mucosal
or mucocutaneous involvement in two dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:401, 1982.
163. Scott DW, Lewis RM: Pemphigus and pemphigoid in
dog and man: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 5:148, 1981.
164. Scott DW: Pemphigus in domestic animals. Clin Dermatol 1:141, 1983.
165. Shirakata Y, et al: Lack of mucosal involvement in
pemphigus foliaceus may be due to low expression of
desmoglein 1. J Invest DermatolllO:76, 1998.
166. Stannard AA, et al: A mucocutaneous disease in the
dog, resembling pemphigus vulgaris in man. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 166:575, 1975.
167. Suter MM, et al: Ultrastructural localization of pemphigus antigens on keratinocytes in vivo and in vitro.
Am J Vet Res 41:507, 1990.
168. Suter MM, et al: Identification of canine pemphigus
antigens. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York,
1993, p 367.
169. Suter MM, et al: Bullous autoimmune skin diseases in
animals. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet DermatoI13:100, 1997.
170. Tur E, Brenner S: Diet and pemphigus. Arch Dermatol 134: 1406, 1998.
171. Walder EJ, Werner A: A possible case of paraneoplastic skin disease with features of erythema multiforme and pemphigus folicaceus in a dog. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am ColI Vet
Dermatol 12:70, 1996.

774 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
172. Wolf R, et aI: Drug-induced versus drug-triggered
pemphigus. Dermatologica 182:207, 1991.
173. Wurm S, et aI: Comparative pathology of pemphigus
in dogs and humans. Clin DermatoI12:515, 1994.
174. Xue W, et aI: Functional involvement of urokinasetype plasminogen activator receptor in pemphigus
acantholysis. J Cutan Pathol 25:469, 1998.

Autoimmune Subepidermal Bullous Dermatoses
175. Ghohestani RF, et aI: Diagnostic value of indirect
immunofluorescence on sodium chloride-split skin in
differential diagnosis of subepidermal autoimmune
bullous dermatoses. Arch DermatoI133:1102, 1997.

Bullous Pemphigoid
176. Borreyo L, et aI: Deposition of eosinophil granule
proteins preceding blister formation in bullous pemphigoid: Comparison with neutrophil and mast cell
granule proteins. Am J PathoI148:897, 1996.
177. Chan LS, et aI: Cloning of the cDNA encoding canine skin basement membrane bullous pemphigoid
antigen 2 reveals molecular and immunologic identity
in the human and canine NC16A domain. J Invest
Dermatol 1l0:509A, 1998.
178. Czech W, et al: Granulocyte activation in bullous diseases: Release of granular proteins in bullous pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris, J Am Acad Dermatol
29:210, 1993.
178a. Dopp R, et aI: IgG4 and IgE are the major immunoglobulins targeting the NC16A domain of BP180 in
bullous pemphigoid: serum levels of these immunoglobulins reflect disease activity. J Am Acad Dermatol
42:577, 2000.
179. Hashimoto T, et aI: Comparative study of bullous
pemphigoid antigens among Japanese, British, and
U.S. patients indicates similar antigen profiles with
the 170-kd antigen present both in the basement
membrane and on the keratinocyte cell membrane. J
Invest Dermatol l00:38S, 1993.
180. Iwasaki T, et aI: Canine bullous pemphigoid (BP)identification of the 180 kd canine BP antigen by
circulating autoantibodies. Vet Pathol 32:387, 1995.
181. Katz SI: Herpes gestationis (pemphigoid gestationis).
In: Freedberg 1M, et aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hili, New York,
1999, p 686.
182. Kunkle G, et aI: Bullous pemphigoid in a dog: A case
report with immunofluorescent findings. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 14:52, 1978.
183. Olivry T: personal communication 1999.
183a. Olivry T, et aI: Novel localized variant of canine
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Vet Rec 146:193,
2000.
184. Olivry T, et aI: Novel feline autoimmune blistering
skin disease resembling bullous pemphigoid in humans: IgG autoantibodies target the NC16A ectodomain of type XVII collagen (BPI80IBPAG2). Vet
Pathol 36:328, 1999.
185. Olivry T, et aI: Canine bullous pemphigoid IgG autobodies target antigenic epitopes in the NC16A ectodomain of type XVII collagen (BPI80IBPAg2). Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet DerrnatoI14:115, 1998.
186. Scott DW: Pemphigoid in domestic animals. Clin
Dermatol 5:155, 1987.
187. Stahle-Backdahl M, et aI: 92-kd gelatinase is produced by eosinophils at the site of blister formation
in bullous pemphigoid and cleaves the extracellular

domain of recombinant 180-kd bullous pemphigoid
autoantigen. J Clin Invest 93:2022, 1994.
188. Stanely JR: Bullous pemphigoid. In: Freedberg 1M, et
aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hili, New York, 1999, p 666.
189. Thomas I, et aI: Treatment of generalized bullous
pemphigoid with oral tetracycline. J Am Acad Dermatol 28:74, 1993.
190. Yancy KB: Cicatricial pemphigoid. In: Freedberg 1M,
et aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-Hili, New York, 1999, p 674.

Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita
191. Olivry T, et aI: Canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita: Circulating autoantibodies target the aminoterminal noncollagenous (NCl) domain of collagen VII
in anchoring fibrils. Vet Dermatol 9:19, 1998.
192. Woodley DT, et aI: Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
In: Freedberg 1M, et aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York,
1999, p 702.
192a. Xu LT, et aI: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a cDNA encoding canine type VII collagen noncollagenous (NCl) domain, the target antigen of autoimmune disease epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA).
Biochim Biophys Acta 1408:25, 1998.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
193. Cohen PL: T- and B-cell abnormalities in systemic
lupus. J Invest DermatoI100:69S, 1993.
194. Chabanne L, et aI: Abnormalities of lymphocyte subsets in canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Autoimmunity 22:1, 1995.
195. Chabanne L, et aI: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Part I: Clinical and biologic aspects. Compend
Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:135, 1999.
196. Chabanne L, et aI: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Part II: Diagnosis and treatment. Compend
Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:402, 1999.
197. Chung JH, et aI: Apoptosis in the pathogenesis of
cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Am J Dermatopathol
20:233, 1998.
198. Clercx C, et aI: Nonresponsive generalized bacterial
infection associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in a Beauceron. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:220,
1999.
199. Day MJ: Inheritance of serum autoantibody, reduced
serum IgA and autoimmune disease in a canine
breeding colony. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 53:207,
1996.
200. Fournel C, et al: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus. Part I: A study of 75 cases. Lupus 1:133, 1992.
201. Hansson H: Antinuclear antibodies: Presence and
specificity in autoimmune connective tissue disease in
the dog. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:225, 1999.
202. Hubert B, et aI: Spontaneous familial systemic lupus
erythematosus in a canine breeding colony. J Comp
Pathol 98:85, 1988.
203. Jackson HA, Olivry T: Cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ulcerative dermatitis) in the Shetland sheepdog
and collie: A review and re-evaluation of the clinical
and histological features. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:31,
1999.
204. Jones DRE: Canine systemic lupus erythematosus:
New insights and their implications. J Comp Pathol
108:215, 1993.
205. Kristensen AT, et aI: Detection of antiplatelet anti-

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 775
body with a platelet immunofluorescence assay. J Vet
Intern Med 8:36, 1994.
206. Lehmann P, et aI: Experimental reproduction of skin
lesions in lupus erythematosus by UVA and UVB radiation. J Am Acad Dermatol 22:181, 1990.
207. McVey DS, Shuman W: Use of multiple antigen substrates to detect antinuclear antibody in canine sera.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 28:37, 1991.
208. Monier JC, et aI: Systemic lupus erythematosus in a
colony of dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:46, 1988.
209. Monestier M, et aI: Autoantibodies to histone, DNA
and nucleosome antigens in canine systemic lupus
erythematosus. Clin Exp Immunol 99:37, 1995.
210. Mooney E, et aI: Characterization of the changes in
matrix molecules at the dermoepidermal junction in
lupus erythematosus. J Cutan Pathol 18:417, 1991.
211. Norris DA: Pathomechanisms of photosensitive lupus
erythematosus. J Invest Dermatol 100:58S, 1993.
212. Olivry T, et aI: Interface dermatitis and sebaceous
adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
(lupoid dermatosis) of German shorthaired pointers.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
CoIl Vet Dermatol 15:41, 1999.
213. Olivry T, et aI: Bullous systemic lupus erythematosus
(type-L) in a dog. Vet Rec 145:165, 1999.
214. Pedersen NC, Barlough JE: Systemic lupus erythematosus in the cat. Feline Pract 19:5, 1991.
215. Prinz JC, et aI: Treatment of severe cutaneous lupus
erythematosus with a chimeric CD4 monoclonal antibody, cM-T412. J Am Acad Dermatol 34:244, 1996.
216. Sauder DN, et aI: Epidermal cytokines in murine
lupus. J Invest Dermatol 100:42S, 1993.
217. Scott DW, et al: Canine lupus erythematosus. I: Systemic lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
19:461, 1983.
218. Sontheimer RD: The lexicon of cutaneous lupus erythematosus: A review and personal perspective on
the nomenclature and classification of the cutaneous
manifestations of lupus erythematosus. Lupus 6:84,
1997.
219. Sontheimer RD: Lupus erythematosus. In: Freedberg
1M, et aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 1993.
220. Soulard M, et aI: The I protein of the heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex is a novel dog nuclear autoantigen. J Autoimmun 9:599, 1996.
221. Stone MS, et aI: Lupus-type anticoagulant in a dog
with hemolysis and thrombosis. J Vet Intern Med 8:
57, 1994.
222. Teichner M, et aI: Systemic lupus erythematosus in
dogs: Association to the major histocompatibility complex class I antigen DLA-A7. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 55:255, 1990.
223. Thoren-ToIling K, Ryden L: Serum auto-antibodies
and clinicallpathologic features in German shepherd
dogs with a lupus-like syndrome. Acta Vet Scand 32:
15, 1991.
224. Velthuis PJ, et aI: Immunohistopathology of light-induced skin lesions in lupus erythematosus. Acta Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) 70:93, 1990.
225. Vitale CB, et aI: Systemic lupus erythematosus in a
cat: Fulfillment of the American Rheumatism Association criteria with supportive skin histopathology. Vet
Dermatol 8:133, 1997.
226. Welin Henricksson E, et aI: Autoantibody profiles in
canine ANA-positive sera investigated by immunoblot
and ELISA. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 61:157,
1998.

227. White SD, et aI: Investigation of antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens in dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:1019,
1992.

Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
228. Cuaguere E, Magnol JP: Lupus erythemateux discoidc a localisation auriculaire chez Ie chien. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 24:101, 1989.
229. Kalaher KM, Scott DW: Discoid lupus erythematosus
in a cat. Feline Pract 19:7, 1991.
230. Iwasaki T, et al: A canine case of discoid lupus erythematosus with circulating autoantibody. J Vet Med
Sci 57:1097, 1995.
231. Olivry T, et aI: Le lupus erythemateux discoide du
chien: A propos de 22 observations. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 22:205, 1987.
232. Rogers KS, et aI: Squamous cell carcinoma of the
canine nasal planum: Eight cases (1988-1994). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 31:373, 1995.
232a. Rosenbaum M: Cyclosporine. Derm Dialogue, Summer 1999, p 5.
233. Rosenkrantz WS: Discoid lupus erythematosus. In:
Griffin CE, et aI (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 149.
234. Scott DW, et aI: Canine lupus erythematosus. II: Discoid lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:
481, 1983.
235. Scott DW, et aI: Unusual findings in canine pemphigus erythematosus and discoid lupus erythematosus. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:579, 1984.
236. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Squamous cell carcinoma
arising in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus nasal
lesions in two German shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol
6:99, 1995.
237. Stanley BJ, et aI: Bilateral rotation flaps for the treatment of chronic nasal dermatitis in four dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 27:295, 1991.
238. Sugai SA, et aI: Cutaneous lupus erythematosus: Direct immunofluorescence and epidermal basement
membrane study. Int J Dermatol 31:260, 1992.
239. Willemse T, et al: Discoid lupus erythematosus in
cats. Vet Dermatol 1:19, 1989.
240. Williams REA, et aI: The contribution of direct immunofluorescence to the diagnosis of lupus erythematosus. J Cutan Pathol 16:122, 1989.

Cryoglobulinemia and Cryo(ibrinogenemia
241. Bridle KH, Littlewood JD: Tail tip necrosis in two
litters of Birman kittens. J Small Anim Pract 39:88,
1998.
242. Cohen SJ, et aI: Cutaneous manifestations of cryoglobulinemia: Clinical and histopathologic study of
seventy-two patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 25:21,
1991.
243. Dickson NJ: Cold agglutinin disease in a puppy associated with lead intoxication. J Small Anim Pract 31:
105, 1990.
244. Godfrey DR, Anderson RM: Cold agglutinin disease
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 35:267, 1994.
245. Nagata M, et aI: Cryoglobulinaemia and cryofibrinogenaemia: A comparison of canine and human cases.
Vet Dermatol 9:277, 1998.
246. Niemand S, et aI: Kalteagglutinin-Krankheit bei einer
Katz. Kleintierpraxis 30:259, 1985.
247. Zulty JC, Kociba GJ: Cold agglutinins in cats with
haemobartonellosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:907,
1990.

776 • Immune-Mediated Disorders

Graft-Versus-Host Disease
248. Hom TD, et al: Reappraisal of histologic features of
the acute cutaneous graft-versus-host reaction based
on an allogenic rodent model. J Invest Dermatol 103:
206, 1994.
249. Johnson ML, Farmer ER: Graft-versus-host reactions
in dermatology. J Am Acad Dermatol 38:369, 1998.
250. Langley RGB, et al: Apoptosis is the mode of keratinocyte death in cutaneous graft-versus-host disease. J
Am Acad DermatoI35:187, 1996.
251. Yu C, et al: Synergism between mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporine in preventing graft-versus-host
disease among lethally irradiated dogs given DLAnonidentical unrelated marrow grafts. Blood 91:2581,
1998.

Cutaneous Adverse Drug Reaction
252. Affolter VK, von Tscharner C: Cutaneous drug reactions: A retrospective study of histopathologic changes
and their correlation with the clinical disease. Vet
DermatoI4:79, 1993.
253. Affolter VK, Shaw SE: Cutaneous drug eruptions. In:
Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 447.
254. Baker JR, et al: Pathologic effects of bleomycin on
the skin of dogs and monkeys. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 25:190, 1973.
255. Barbaud AM, et al: Role of delayed cellular hypersensitivity and adhesion molecules in amoxicillin-induced
morbilliform rashes. Arch DermatoI133:481, 1997.
256. Barthold SW, et al: Reversible dermal atrophy in a
cat with phenytoin. Vet PathoI17:469, 1980.
257. Bureau of Veterinary Drugs: Suspected drug adverse
reactions reported to the Bureau of Veterinary Drugs.
Can Vet J 33:237, 1992.
258. Carlotti DN, Bensignor E: La gale sarcoptique du
chien: Etude retrospective de 38 cas. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 32:117,1997.
259. Cribb AE: Idiosyncratic reactions to sulfonamides in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1612, 1989.
260. Giger U, et al: Sulfadiazine-induced allergy in six
Doberman pinschers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:479,
1985.
261. Gordon KG, et al: Pseudomycosis fungoides in a patient taking clonazepam and Huoxetine. J Am Acad
Vet Dermatol 34:304, 1996.
262. Gupta AK, et al: Lymphocytic infiltrates of the skin in
association with cyclosporine therapy. J Am Acad
Dermatol 23:1137, 1990.
263. Hammer AS, Cuoto CG: Diagnosing and treating canine hemangiosarcoma. Vet Med 87:188, 1992.
264. Hendrick MJ, Dunagan CA: Focal necrotizing granulomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous injection of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases
(1988-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:304, 1991.
265. Henricks PM: Dermatitis associated with the use of
primidone in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:237,
1987.
266. Kunkle G: Adverse cutaneous reactions in cats given
methimazole. Derm Dialogue Spring/Summer, 1993,
p 4.
267. Magro CM, et al: The interstitial granulomatous drug
reaction: A distinctive clinical and pathologic entity. J
Cutan Pathol 25:72, 1998.
268. Mason KV: Subepidermal bullous drug eruption resembling bullous pemphigoid in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 190:881, 1987.

269. Mason KV: Cutaneous drug eruptions. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 20:1633, 1990.
270. Mason KV, Rosser EJ: Cutaneous drug eruptions. In:
von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology I. Balliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 426.
271. Mason KV: Fixed drug eruption in two dogs caused
by diethylcarbamazine. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:
301, 1988.
272. Mason KV, Day MJ: A pemphigus foliaceus-like
eruption associated with the use of ampicillin in a cat.
Aust Vet J 64:223, 1987.
273. Mason KV: Blistering drug eruptions in animals. Clin
Dermatol11:567, 1993.
274. Mauldin GN, et al: Efficacy and toxicity of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide used in the treatment of
selected malignant tumors in 23 cats. J Vet Intern
Med 2:60, 1988.
275. McEwan NA, et al: Drug eruption in a cat resembling pemphigus foliaceus. J Small Anim Pract 28:
713, 1987.
276. Ogilvie GK, et al: Acute and short-term toxicoses associated with the administration of doxorubicin to
dogs with malignant tumors. J Am Vet Med Assoc
195:1584, 1989.
277. Ogilvie GK, et al: Hypotension and cutaneous reactions associated with intravenous administration of
etoposide in the dog. Am J Vet Res 49:1367, 1988.
278. Perez T, et al: Hypersensitivity reactions to drugs:
Correlation between clinical probability score and laboratory diagnostic procedure. J Invest Clin Immunol
5:276, 1995.
279. Plotnick AN, et al: Primary cutaneous coccidioidomycosis and subsequent drug eruption to itraconazole in
a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:139, 1997.
280. Rijlaarsdam U, et al: Mycosis fungoides-like lesions
associated with phenytoin and carbamazepine therapy.
J Am Acad Dermatol 24:216, 1991.
281. Roche E, Mason KV: Periocular alopecia caused by a
fixed drug eruption. Aust Vet Pract 21:80, 1991.
282. Rosenkrantz WS: Cutaneous drug reactions. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 154.
283. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Cyclosporine and cutaneous
immune-mediated disease. J Am Acad Dermatol 14:
1088, 1986.
284. Scott OW, et al. Drug eruption associated with sulfonamide treatment of vertebral osteomyelitis in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:1111, 1976.
285. Scott DW: Drug eruption in a cat due to a miticide.
Feline Pract 7:47, 1977.
286. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: Literature review and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
1998.
287. Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the dog: Literature review and
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
1999.
288. Scott OW: Folliculite murale granulomateuse chez Ie
chien: Manifestation d'un accident medicamenteux
cutane? Med Vet Quebec 29:154, 1999.
289. Stanley RG, Jabara AG: Chronic skin reaction to a
combined feline rhinotracheitis virus (herpesvirus)
and calicivirus vaccine. Aust Vet J 65:128, 1988.
290. Stem RS, Wintroub BU: Cutaneous reactions to
drugs. In: Freedberg 1M, et aI (eds): Fitzpatrick's

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 777
Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1999, p 1633.
291. Van Hees J, et al: Levamisole-induced drug eruptions
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:255, 1985.
292. Vitale CB, et al: Putative diethylcarbamazine-induced
urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in a dog. Vet
Dermatol 5:197, 1994.
293. Vitale CB, et al: Putative Rimadyl-induced neutrophilic dermatosis resembling Sweet's syndrome in 2
dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:69, 1999.
294. Walder E: Superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis in miniature schnauzers. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p 419.
295. Wolkenstien P, et al: Metabolic predisposition to cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Arch Dermatol 131:
544,1995.

Erythema Multiforme and Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis
296. Akosa AB, Elhag AM: Toxic epidermal necrolysis: A
study of the sweat glands. J Cutan Pathol 22:359,
1995.
297. Assier H, et al: Erythema multiforme with mucous
membrane involvement and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are clinically different disorders with distinct
causes. Arch Dermatol 131:539, 1995.
298. Bastuji-Garin S, et al: Clinical classification of cases of
toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-johnson's syndrome and erythema multiforme. Arch Dermatol 129:
92, 1993.
299. Becker DS: Toxic epidermal necrolysis. Lancet 351:
1417, 1998.
300. Child FJ, et al: Rowell's syndrome. Clin Exp Dermatol 24:74, 1999.
301. Cote B, et al: Clinicopathologic correlation in erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Arch Dermatol 131:1268, 1995.
302. Delmage DA, Payne-Johnson CE: Erythema multiforme in a Doberman on trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole therapy. J Small Anim Pract 32:635, 1991.
303. Egan CA, et al: Plasmapheresis as an adjunct treatment in toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Am Acad Dermatol 40:458, 1999.
304. Foedinger D, et al: Autoantibodies against desmoplakin I and II define a subset of patients with erythema multiforme major. J Invest DermatoI106:1012,
1996.
305. Frank AA, et al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis associated
with flea dips. Vet Hum Toxicol 34:57, 1992.
306. Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Erythema multiforme. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's
Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1999, p 636.
307. Fritsch PO, Ruiz-Maldonado R: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Freedberg
1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999, p 644.
308. Hinn AC, et al: Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis in the
dog: Clinical classification, drug exposure, and histopathologic correlations. J Vet Allergy Clin Immunol6:
13, 1998.
309. Inachi S, et al: Epidermal apoptotic cell death in
erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Arch Dermatol 133:845, 1997.
310. McMurdy MA: A case resembling erythema multi-

forme major (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) in a dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:297, 1990.
311. Medleau L, et al: Erythema multiforme and disseminated intravascular coagulation in a dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:643, 1990.
312. Mirowsk GW, et al: Altered expression of epithelial
integrins and extracellular matrix receptors in oral erythema multifonne. J Cutan Pathol 23:473, 1996.
313. Paquet P, Pieraud GE: Soluble fractions of tumor
necrosis factor-a, interleukin-6 and their receptors in
toxic epidermal necrolysis: A comparison with seconddegree bums. Int J Mol Med 1:459, 1998.
314. Paquet P, Pieraud GE: Epidermal calprotectin in
drug-induced toxic epidermal necrolysis. J Cutan
Pathol 26:301, 1999.
315. Paquet P, Pieraud GE: Erythema multiforme and
toxic epidermal necrolysis: A comparative study. Am J
Dermatopathol 19:127, 1997.
316. Power H: Practice tip. Derm Dialogue Winter 1993/
1994, P 7.
317. Rachofsky MA, et al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Compend Cont Educ 11:840, 1989.
318. Rosenbaum MR, Kerlin RL: Erythema multiforme
major and disseminated intravascular coagulation in a
dog following application of a d-limonene-based insecticidal dip. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1315, 1995.
319. Roujeau J: The spectrum of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: A clinical classification. J Invest Dermatol 102:28S, 1994.
320. Roujeau J: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis are severity variants of the same
disease which differs from erythema multiforme. J
Dermatol 24:726, 1997.
321. Rzony B, et al: Histopathologic and epidemiological
characteristics of patients with erythema exudativum
multifonne major, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Br J Dermatol 135:6,
1996.
322. Scott DW, et al: Erythema multiforme in the dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:453, 1983.
323. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Erythema multiforme in
dogs and cats: Literature review and case material
from the Cornell University College of Veterinary
Medicine (1988-96). Vet DermatoI1O:297, 1999.
324. Scott DW, et al: Toxic epidermal necrolysis in two
dogs and a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:271, 1979.
325. Viard I, et al: Inhibition of toxic epidermal necrolysis
by blockage of CD95 with human intravenous immunoglobulin. Science 282:490, 1998.

Vasculitis
326. Beale KM: Vasculopathy in two dogs associated with
ivermectin administration. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet DermatoI15:39,
1999.
327. Bensignor E: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim
Pract 40:151, 1999.
328. Carpenter JL, et al: Idiopathic cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol
25:401, 1988.
329. Cowan LA, et al: Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in greyhounds with cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992-1994). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 210:789, 1997.
330. Crawford MA, Foil CS: Vasculitis: Clinical syndromes
in small animals. Compend Cont Educ 11:400, 1989.
331. Fondati A, et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy and
demodicosis in a German shepherd dog. J Small
Anim Pract 39:137, 1998.

778 • Immune-Mediated Disorders
332. Frank LA: Rabies vaccine-induced ischemic dermatitis in a dog. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 6:9, 1998.
333. Griffin CEo Pinnal Diseases: The Complete Manual
of Ear Care. Solvay Veterinary, Inc., Princeton, 1985,
p 21.
334. Griffin CEo Pinnal diseases. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 24:897, 1994.
335. Cuaguere E, et al: Lesions cutanees associees a des
maladies internes chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 32:275, 1997.
336. Legendre AM, et al: Treatment of blastomycosis with
intraconazole in 112 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 10:365,
1996.
337. Lotti T, et al: Cutaneous small-vessel vasculitis. J Am
Acad Dermatol 39:667, 1998.
338. Mathet JL, et al: Vascularite leucocytoclasique primaire a localisation cutaneo-muqueuse chez Ie chat: A
propos de deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 32:
293, 1997.
339. Mandell BF, Hoffman GS: Systemic necrotizing arteritis. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1999, p 2034.
340. Manning TO, Scott DW: Cutaneous vasculitis in a
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:61, 1980.
341. Morris DO: Cutaneous vasculitides. Proc Am Coil Vet
Intern Med Forum 16:452, 1998.
342. Nichols PR, et al: A retrospective study of canine and
feline cutaneous vasculitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet DermatoI14:27,
1998.
343. Parker WM, Foster RA: Cutaneous vasculitis in five
Jack Russell terriers. Vet Dermatol 7:109, 1996.
344. Pedersen K, Scott DW: Idiopathic pyogranulomatous
inflammation and leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the nasal planum, nostrils and nasal mucosa in Scottish terriers in Denmark. Vet Dermatol 2:85, 1991.
345. Rachofsky MA, et al: Probable hypersensitivity vasculitis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1592, 1989.
346. Scott DW: Eosinophils in the walls of large dermal
and subcutaneous blood vessels in biopsy specimens
from cats with eosinophilic granuloma or eosinophilic
plaque. Vet Dermatol 10:77, 1999.
347. Soter NA: Cutaneous necrotizing venulitis. In: Freedberg 1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine V. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999,
p 2044.
348. Vitale CB, et al: Vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathy in the dog. Vet DermatollO:131, 1999.
349. von Tscharner C, Haemmerling R: Granulomatous
vasculitis in a West Highland white terrier. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil
Vet Dermatol 14:85, 1998.
350. Weir JA, et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of
German shepherds: Clinical, genetic and preliminary
pathologic and immunological studies. Can Vet J 35:
763,1994.
351. Wilcock BP, Yager JA: Focal cutaneous vasculitis and
alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 188:1174, 1986.

Unear IgA Pustular Dermatosis
352. Scott DW, et al: Linear IgA dermatoses in the dog:
Bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus erythematosus and
a subcorneal pustular dermatitis. Cornell Vet 72:394,
1982

Uveodermatologic Syndrome
353. Boldy KL, et al: Uveodermatologic syndrome in the

dog: Clinical characteristics and treatment of a disorder similar to human Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. Vet Focus 1:112, 1989.
354. Campbell KL, et al: Generalized leukoderma and poliosis following uveitis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 22:121, 1986.
355. Herrera DH, Duchene AG: Uveodermatological syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome) with
generalized depigmentation in a Dachshund. Vet
Ophthalmol 1:47, 1998.
356. Kern TJ, et aI: Uveitis associated with poliosis and
vitiligo in six dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:408,
1985.
357. Lindley DM, et al: Ocular histology of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome in an akita dog. Vet Pathol
27:294, 1990.
358. MacDonald JM: Uveodermatologic syndrome in the
dog. In: Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary
Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993,
p 217.
359. Morgan RV: Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome in humans and dogs. Compend Cont Educ 11:1211, 1989.
360. Murphy C], et al: Antiretinal antibodies associated
with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome in a dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:399, 1991.
361. Slinckx J, Fontaine J: Un cas de syndrome uveodermatologique ressemblant au syndrome Vogt-KoyanagiHarada chez un fox terrier. Point Vet 30:243, 1999.
362. Tachikawa S, et al: Uveodermatologic (Vogt-KoyanagiHarada-like) syndrome with sloughing of the nails in
a Siberian husky. J Vet Med (Tokyo) 48:559, 1995.
363. Vercelli A, et al: Canine Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
syndrome in two Siberian husky dogs. Vet Dermatol
1:151, 1990.
364. Warmoes T: Modele canine d'un syndrome de VogtKoyanagi-Harada. Point Vet 30:249, 1999.

Auricular Chondritis
365. Badoil F: Etude comparative chez l'homme et Ie chat
de la polychondrite atrophiante chronique. These,
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire de Lyon, 1996.
366. Boord MJ, Griffin CEo Aural chondritis or polychondritis dessicans in a dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 14:65,
1998.
367. Bunge MM, et al: Relapsing polychondritis in a cat. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:203, 1992.
368. Cuaguere E, et al: Polychondrite auriculaire atrophiante: A propos d'un cas chez un chat. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 27:557, 1992.
369. Lemmens P, Schrauwen E: Feline relapsing polychondritis: A case report. Vlaams Diergeneeskd
Tijdschr 62:183, 1993.

Immunoproliferative Enteropathy of Basenji Dogs
370. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Clinical and laboratory characterization of basenjis with immunoproliferative
small intestinal disease. Am J Vet Res 45:267, 1984.

Alopecia Areata
371. DeJonghe SR, et al: Trachyonychia associated with
alopecia areata in a Rhodesian ridgeback. Vet Dermatol 10:123, 1999.
372. Elston DM, et al: Eosinophils in fibrous tracts and
near hair bulbs: A helpful diagnosttc feature of alopecia areata. J Am Acad Dermatol 37:101, 1997.
372a. Madani S, Shapiro J: Alopecia areata update. J Am
Acad Dermatol 42:549, 2000.
373. McElwee KJ, et al: Comparison of alopecia areata in

Immune-Mediated Disorders • 779
human and nonhuman mammalian species. Pathobiology 66:90, 1998.
374. OliVI)' T, et al: Antifollicular cell-mediated and humoral immunity in canine alopecia areata. Vet Dermatol 7:67, 1996.
375. Tobin DJ, et al: Hair follicle-specific antibodies in
mammalian species with alopecia areata. J Invest
Dermatol 108:654, 1997.
376. Tobin DJ, et al: Anti-trichohyalin antibodies in canine
alopecia areata. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 353.

Pseudope/ade
377. Gross TL, et al: Morphologic and immunologic characterization of a canine isthmus mural folliculitis resembling pseudopelade of humans. Vet Dermatol 11:
17,2000.
378. Power HT, et al: Novel feline alopecia areata-like
dermatosis: Cytotoxic T lymphocytes target the follicular isthmus. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 538.
379. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 14:27, 1998.

Amyloidosis
380. Alhaidari Z, et al: Amylose cutaneomuqueuse chez un
chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 26:341, 1991.

381. DiBartola SP, Benson MD: The pathogenesis of reactive systemic amyloidosis. J Vet Intern Med 3:31,
1989.
382. DiBartola SP, et al: Familial renal amyloidosis in Chinese Shar Pei dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:483,
1990.
383. Dodds JW: Amyloidosis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
100, 1995.
384. Gelens HC, et al: Reactive amyloidosis in a puppy,
associated with a chronic inflammatory syndrome. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:529, 1994.
385. Van der Linde-Sipman JS, et al: Generalized AAamyloidosis in Siamese and Oriental cats. Vet Irnmunol Immunopathol 56:1, 1997.
386. Platz SJ, et al: Identification of lambda light chain
amyloid in eight canine and two feline extramedullary
plasmacytomas. J Comp Pathol 116:45, 1997.
387. Snyder PW, et al: Pathologic features of naturally
occurring juvenile polyarteritis in beagle dogs. Vet
Pathol 32:337, 1995.
388. Schwartzman RM: Cutaneous amyloidosis associated
with a monoclonal gammopathy in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 185:102, 1984.
389. Touart DM, Sau P: Cutaneous deposition diseases:
Part I. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:149, 1998.

Chapter

10
Endocrine and Metabolic
Diseases

M

any hormones affect the skin and adnexa." Although this chapter is limited to a
discussion of endocrine influences on the skin, hormones also affect the rest of the
body. The specific actions of many proven and alleged hormonal imbalances on the skin
are often poorly understood. Additionally, confusion is intensified by (1) species differences, (2) lack of adequate, standardized, or readily available diagnostic tests, (3) conflicting data in the literature, and (4) the complex physiologic and pathophysiologic interrelationships between the endocrine glands and their hormonal products. The skin must
also be regarded as having endocrine functions because it is a major site for the metabolism and interconversion of many of the steroids.
With the exception of some of the sex hormone dermatoses, animals with an endocrine or metabolic disorder have both dermatologic and constitutional signs of illness.
Depending on the disease under consideration and the astuteness of the owner, the skin
changes may be noticed months before the constitutional signs. Classically, endocrine
disorders are associated with a symmetric, nonpruritic hair loss. Early on, however, the
animal may have no hair loss but be presented for a localized (e.g., ceruminous otitis
extema) or generalized seborrheic condition, recurrent bacterial infection, or some other
cutaneous abnormality (e.g., cutaneous mucinosis). If there is an endocrine basis for the
disorder under consideration, hair loss eventually accompanies the abnormality. Because
most dogs and cats go through two hair cycles per year, hair loss should appear within 6
months of the presenting complaint. If the chronically affected animal has a perfectly
normal coat, an endocrine causality is very unlikely and any abnormal laboratory data
should be interpreted cautiously.
With a coat change, the hair in the involved areas is dull and dry and usually epilates
easily. Epilated hairs may not regrow (e.g., hypothyroidism), may regrow very slowly (e.g.,
hyperadrenocorticism), or may regrow very abnormally (e.g., the woolly coat of adrenal
hyperplasia-like syndrome). In hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism, all hair follicles on
the trunk are affected and advanced cases have a bilaterally symmetric truncal alopecia.
Early in the course of the disease, the hair loss may be localized to regions of the body
(e.g., flank and saddle areas) and necessitate the consideration of nonendocrine causes of
hair loss. Eventually, the hair loss becomes more widespread. Because there is a topographic variation in the number and/or affinity of sex hormone receptors in dog skin, the
sex hormone dermatoses have a more regionalized pattern of alopecia that persists in
those areas for extended periods of time .

• FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF THE ENDOCRINE
HYPOTHALAMUS AND HYPOPHYSIS
Anatomically and functionally, the hypothalamus and the hypophysis (pituitary gland) are
most usefully thought of together as the "master gland" or the "endocrine hrain.i": 2 The
important portion of the hypophysis as it relates to dermatology is the adenohypophysis
(anterior pituitary, or pars distalis).
The hypothalamus contains a number of specialized cells that combine neural and
secretory activity: the endocrine neurons. The endocrine hypothalamus produces hor-

780

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 781
manes (adenohypophysiotropic releasing and inhibiting factors) that are transported as
unstainable neurosecretions to the pituitary portal system and then to the adenohypophysis. Important hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting factors that control the adenohypophysis include the following:
• Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) (or adrenocorticotropic hormone-releasing factor [ACTH-RF], corticotropin-releasing hormone [CRH])
• Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) (or thyroid-stimulating hormone-releasing
factor [TSH-RF], thyrotropin-releasing factor [TRF])
• Growth hormone-releasing factor (GHRF) (or somatotropin-releasing factor [SRF])
• Growth hormone-inhibiting factor (GHIF) (or somatotropin-inhibiting factor [SIF],
somatostatin)
• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) (or follicle-stimulating hormone-releasing
hormone [FSH-RH], luteinizing hormone-vreleasing hormone [LH-RH])
• Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF)
• Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF)
These hypophysiotropic factors are presently thought to be regulated by higher brain
centers, adenohypophyseal hormones ("short-loop" feedback system), and target endocrine
gland hormones ("long-loop" system).
By means of light microscopy and acidic or basic dye-staining characteristics, the
adenohypophysis is seen to consist of three cell types: acidophils (producing growth
hormone [GH] and prolactin), basophils (producing follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH],
luteinizing hormone [LH], thyrotropin [TSH], B-lipotropin, and corticotropin [ACTH]),
and chromophobes (producing ACTH and B-lipotropin).2 When electron microscopy and
immunohistochemical examination are used, the adenohypophysis is observed to consist of
five cell types: thyrotrophs (producing TSH), corticotrophs (producing ACTH and
B-lipotropin), gonadotrophs (producing FSH and LH), somatotrophs (producing GH), and
mammotrophs (producing prolactinl.l- 2 The release of adenohypophyseal hormones is
thought to be regulated by hypophysiotropic factors from the hypothalamus and negative
feedback by target endocrine gland hormones.
In general, three factors determine the secretory rates of the endocrine glands:
(1) humoral feedback loops, (2) neurologic stimulation or suppression, and (3) genetic
influence. The effects of hormones depend on many factors, including the chemical
structure, the concentration in the blood, the method of transport in the blood, the
quantity of unbound target cell receptors, the integrity of target cell postreceptor mechanism, and the rate of hormonal degradation and elimination.
Most peptide hormones (e.g., ACTH, TSH, FSH, LH, and TRH) initiate their actions
by activating the cell membrane enzyme adenyl cyclase and the cyclic adenosine monophosphate system. Steroid hormones (e.g., glucocorticoids and sex hormones) pass through
target cell membranes and bind to cytoplasmic receptors'f", the resultant steroid-receptor
complex binds to nuclear chromatin to initiate activity. Thyroid hormones pass into target
cell cytoplasm to the nucleus, where they bind chromatin receptors and initiate activity.
The basic causes of endocrine disease include the following: (1) primary hyperfunction (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism due to functional pituitary and adrenal neoplasms and
hyperestrogenism due to functional ovarian or testicular neoplasms), (2) secondary hyperfunction (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism due to bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia), (3) primary hypofunction (e.g., congenital or acquired hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism due
to cystic Rathke's cleft), (4) secondary hypofunction (e.g., secondary hypothyroidism due
to hypopituitarism), (5) ectopic hypersecretion (e.g., ectopic ACTH syndrome), (6) failure
of target cell response, (7) abnormal degradation of hormone (e.g., feminization due to
chronic liver disease), (8) hormone interactions (e.g., antiandrogenic actions of progestogens), and (9) iatrogenic hormone excess (excessive glucocorticoids, progestogens, or estrogens).!' 2

782 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

• DIAGNOSIS OF ENDOCRINOPATHIES
The diagnosis of clinical endocrinopathies is usually based on finding an abnormal concentration of a hormone in the blood. The ideal endocrine assay does not exist. Although
radioimmunoassay (RIA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are the most
sensitive, specific, accurate, and precise available methods of measuring hormones, these
techniques are usually species specific and must be specially validated for dogs and cats.
Any laboratory not willing to provide validation information on request is best avoided.
Basal (resting) levels of serum and plasma hormones frequently do not distinguish
normal individuals from those with an endocrinopathy. At anyone moment in time, a dog
with an endocrine disorder can have hormone levels within the normal range. Conversely,
a normal dog may have a subnormal level. Basal blood hormone levels fluctuate in
response to environmental, psychic, circadian, and drug-induced influences, and they vary
with age, breed, sex, and so forth." Thus, various stimulation and suppression tests are
routinely employed to overcome this unreliability of basal blood hormone levels.
The endocrine system is very dynamic, and hormonal interactions are complex. It is
not at all uncommon for one hormone, in deficiency or excess, to affect the levels of
another hormone. Common examples include pseudohypothyroidism in the dog with
hyperadrenocorttcism'v" or decreased growth hormone levels in dogs with hypothyroidism,87 sex hormone imbalances.!' or adrenal disease.P'' The laboratory abnormalities usually disappear once the primary endocrine disorder is resolved. If the abnormalities persist
or are associated with clinical Signs, the dog may suffer from panhypopituitarism356. 363 or
have a polyglandular syndromeP- 7 In these syndromes, multiple glands become dysfunctional simultaneously and require individual treatment. When widespread clinicopathologic
and endocrine abnormalities exist in the same patient, multiple laboratory evaluations are
needed for the patient's complete evaluation .

• THYROID HORMONES
A deficiency of thyroid hormone action is the most common endocrine dermatosis of
dogs, but it is rare as a naturally occurring disorder in cats. I, 2, 106 The etiology of canine
hypothyroidism is complex, with the most important cause being lymphocytic (autoimmune) thyroiditis.

Thyroid Physiology
Canine thyroid physiology is a complex subject and has been exhaustively revtewed.'?' It
has been shown that dogs produce 3,5,3',5'-tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine [T4 ] ) , 3,5,3'triiodothyronine (T3), 3,3' ,5'-triiodothyronine ("reverse" T 3 [rT 3]), 3,3'-diiodothyronine
(3,3'-T2 ) , and 3',5'-diiodothyronine (3',5'-T2 ) . I . 79, 83, 96
The thyroid gland secretes all the T 4, but up to 60% of the daily T3 requirement is
formed via monodeiodination (thyroxine 5' -deiodinase) from T 4 in peripheral tissues. The
preference of canine thyroid to secrete T3 rather than T 4 is enhanced by TSH. T 3 is more
potent and penetrates much faster into interstitial and intracellular spaces than does T 4'
Iodine-deficient dogs show an 80% reduction in their serum T 4 levels, but their serum T3
levels remain normal and the dogs remain eumetabolic. In addition, hypothyroid dogs
being adequately maintained on only oral liothyronine (T3) have no detectable serum T 4,
whereas those maintained on only oral levothyroxine (T4) show normal levels of both
serum T3 and T 4' Thus, T3 is the major metabolically active thyroid hormone in dogs, with
T 4 serving mainly as a prohormone.
In dogs, rT3, which is metabolically inactive, is formed via monodeiodination (thyrox'See references 1, 2, 12, 14, 68, 91, 131, 133, 137, 183, 212.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 783

ine 5-deiodinase) from T 4 • In human beings and rodents, a number of conditions (chronic
and acute illnesses, surgical trauma, fasting, starvation, fever, and glucocorticoid therapy)
produce moderate to marked reduction of serum T 3 levels, mild to marked reduction of
serum T4 levels, and marked elevation of serum rT 3 levels. 28, 47. 48,101,162 In these circumstances, the patients are euthyroid and in no need of thyroid medication. This situation is
called the euthyroid sick syndrome and is a common source of misdiagnosis when basal T 3
and T 4 serum levels are used to diagnose hypothyroidism. The euthyroid sick syndrome
also occurs in dogs and cats." It is thought that this metabolic switch in the sick patient is
protective by counteracting the excessive calorigenic effects of T 3 in catabolic states and is
caused by an inhibition of one or more iodothyronine B-ring deiodinases, leading to both
decreased production of T 3 from T 4 and decreased rT 3 degradation.
Studies in dogs have shown that T 2 is the major product of peripheral tissue deiodination of T 3 and rT 3 • T 2 is metabolically inactive.
Information on thyroid physiology in cats is minimal, and naturally occurring feline
hypothyroidism has been documented rarely. It is known that cats produce both T 3 and

T 4' 11,15.17

Thyroid Hormones and the Skin
Thyroid hormone plays a dominant role in controlling metabolism and is essential for
normal growth and development. 1. 2 The primary mechanisms of action of thyroid hormone are stimulation of cytoplasmic protein synthesis and increase of tissue oxygen
consumption. These effects are thought to be initiated by the binding of thyroid hormone
to nuclear chromatin and by augmentation of the transcription of genetic information.
Available data suggest that thyroid hormone plays a pivotal role in the differentiation and
maturation of mammalian skin, as well as in the maintenance of normal cutaneous function.
Hypothyroidism results in epidermal atrophy and abnormal keratinization because of
decreased protein synthesis, mitotic activity, and oxygen consumption in dogs and humans.': 2 The thyroid hormone-deficient epidermis is characterized by both abnormal
lipogenesis and decreased sterol synthesis by keratinocytes.P" Epidermal melanosis may
occur in hypothyroid dogs and humans, but the pathogenic mechanism is unclear. 11
Sebaceous gland atrophy occurs in hypothyroid dogs and humans, and sebum excretion
rates are reduced in hypothyroid humans and rats.!! 32 Hypothyroid dogs have increased
triglyceride levels because of impaired plasma clearance.I'" Alterations in plasma fatty acid
levels also occur, with increases in oleic and linoleic acids and decreases in dihomo-ylinolenic, arachidonic, and other elongation acids." Similar changes occur in the cutaneous
fatty acid concentrations. Thyroid hormones may regulate .l-6-desaturase activity.
Thyroid hormone is necessary for the initiation of the anagen phase of the hair follicle
cycle.'! Anagen is not initiated in hypothyroid dogs, resulting in retention of the hair
follicles in telogen and leading to failure of hair growth and alopecia. The oral or topical
administration of T 4 to normal dogs increases both the growth rate of hair and the
numbers of anagen hair follicles, especially in the flanks. 61
In hypothyroid dogs, humans, and rats, glycosaminoglycans accumulate in the dermis,
leading to an increase in the interstitial ground substance and a thick, myxedematous
dermis. 1, 2 The exact cause of this tissue mucinosis is unknown, but because thyroid
hormones are thought to restrain the synthesis and to increase the catabolism of glycosaminoglycans, decreased thyroid function should cause an accumulation in the dermis.
Thyroid hormone has been reported to heal the ulcers and to reduce the scarring
associated with chronic radiodermatitis in humans and to improve the healing of deep
dermal bums in rats.'! These effects were thought to be due to actions of thyroid
hormone on the proliferation and metabolism of fibroblasts and collagen synthesis. In

'See references 1, 2, 48, 65, 95, 101, 103, 132, 158.

784 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

humans, hypothyroidism is associated with a 50% reduction in plasma fibronectin levels. 11
Not surprisingly, the skin of hypothyroid dogs and human beings exhibits poor wound
healing and easy bruising.
Bacterial pyoderma is a common complication of canine hypothyroidism.I- 20, 101, 137 In
various animal models, it has been reported that (1) the development of lymphoid tissue
depends on the integrity of the thyroid gland, (2) thyroidectomy results in hypoplasia of
lymphoid organs and thymus, and (3) depletion of thyroid hormones results in impaired
neutrophil functions and B- and T-lymphocyte functions.
Uncomplicated canine hypothyroidism is characterized by the absence of pruritus.
Tissue levels of histamine are decreased in experimental canine hypothyroidism.'! Clinically, canine hypothyroidism is characterized by (1) bilaterally symmetric alopecia, (2) a
dull, dry, easily epilated haircoat that fails to grow after clipping, (3) variable hyperpigmentation, (4) skin that is often dry, cool to the touch, thick, and puffy, (5) poor wound
healing, (6) easy bruising, (7) frequent seborrheic skin disease, bacterial pyoderma, or
both, and (8) variable changes of coat color. Histologically, the condition is characterized
by various combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular
dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame follicles), epidermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy, thick dermis, and
increased dermal mucin (myxedema)." 16

Thyroid Function Tests
Despite the routine and regular use of thyroid function tests in veterinary medicine since
the early 1970s, the practitioner is still plagued with the problem of making an accurate
but inexpensive diagnosis of hypothyroidism. After years of discussion on the inaccuracy of
single sample measurements of any of the various thyroid hormones, the use of stimulation tests, either the TSH-response test or the TRH-response test, became routine.
Although these tests were not foolproof, they had a high sensitivity and specificity for
thyroid disease. In most parts of the world today, TSH is not available at any price and
TRH, when available, is very expensive. Some preliminary work has been done with the
new recombinant human TSH (rhTSH), and this hormone probably will be useful in
testing dogs and cats.!" Recombinant TRH (rhTRH) is also available but has not been
tested. As one might imagine, these new hormones are very expensive and will not find
their way into veterinary medicine until their costs decrease Significantly.
Until a new function test becomes available, the practitioner has returned to the dark
ages of thyroid testing where only single sample measurements are available for interpretation. However, great strides have been made since the 1970s. If samples are sent to
qualified laboratories and seriously ill animals or those under the influence of drugs known
to influence thyroid hormones are not tested, hypothyroidism or euthyroidism can be
accurately diagnosed in over 95% of animals tested.

SERUM THYROID HORMONE DETERMINATIONS
RIA or ELISA methods are used to determine serum levels of total T 4 (TT4 ) , free T 4
(fT4 ) , total T3 (TT 3), free T3 (fT 3), and reverse T3 (rT3). Serum samples may be held at
room temperature for at least 1 week with no Significant deterioration.P Reported basal
serum levels of thyroid hormones in dogs are as follows: TT 4 , 1.5 to 4 JLg/dl; fT4 , 0.3 to
1.7 ng/dl; TT3, 75 to 160 ng/dl: and fT3: 0.3 to 0.6 ng/dl. However, because not all
laboratories may use the same assay kit or technique to determine their results, normal
ranges can vary from laboratory to laboratory. Because normal levels of TT 3 and fT 3 are
common in hypothyroid dogs,23, 78, 102 these hormones appear to have little diagnostic
specificity for hypothyroidism and will not be discussed further.
The sensitivity and the specificity of TT 4 measurements in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism have been studied extensively. These measurements can lead to erroneous diagnoses, especially if the patient's state of health and drug history are ignored. Low levels can
occur with a variety of acute and chronic illnesses (euthyroid sick syndrome), including

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 785

hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, hypoadrenocorticism, liver disease, renal failure,
various cutaneous and noncutaneous infectious diseases, and a variety of other conditions.
Drugs can decrease or falsely increase TT 4 levels by changing its production, binding,
or metabolism. Anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, phenytoin, and diazepam) and glucocorticoids are the most common offenders, but salicylates, phenylbutazone, sulfonamide antimicrobials, radiocontrast agents, mitotane (o,p'-DDD), furosemide, various cardiac drugs,
androgens, and estrogens, to name a few, have also been Implicated.v- 54. 75, 101, 102, 157 Of
special concern in dogs with dermatologic disease are corticosteroids'< 158 and the potentiated sulfonamides.Pv 70, 103, 157 Because dogs receive these or other medications because
of illness, thyroid levels could be suppressed by both the disease and the drug.
Variations in TT4 levels can occur with season,I, 2, II time of day,91, 99 breed, I, 2,12,48,101,140
body size,l1, 133 age,12. 133 and the reproductive status of bitches. 131. 160 With all these
variables, it is not surprising that TT 4 measurements can be unreliable. Compounding the
problems in measurement are those of interpreting test results. Most laboratories report
their normal values in a range; some report the mean value and its standard deviation. If
one interprets a test result that is just below the lower limit of the normal or below the
mean as abnormal, the margin of error in that interpretation is high.
To reduce the frequency of the misdiagnosis of hypothyroidism, many laboratories
suggest a gray zone of interpretation wherein the test results may not be accurate in the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Typically used zones are 1.0 to 1.5 JLg/dl when the normal
range is greater than 1.5 or values that fall between 1 and 2 standard deviations of the
mean. By making the definition of hypothyroidism more stringent (e.g., a value below
1.0 JLg/dl or less than 2 standard deviations from the mean), the specificity of TT 4
increases. However, some normal dogs have TT 4 values within these stricter guidelines
and some hypothyroid dogs are within the gray zone or normal range. Without strict
guidelines, basal TT 4 measurements can be low in approximately 20% of euthyroid dogs'!
and be normal in 30% to 50% of hypothyroid dogs. lI8 With stricter criteria, TT 4 is in the
normal range in only approximately 10% of hypothyroid dogs.43, 124 Unfortunately, the
misdiagnosis rate of approximately 20% in the euthyroid dogs can still be expected.
In humans, serum thyroid hormone-binding protein levels are known to markedly
influence serum thyroid hormone levels." 101 Thyroid hormone-binding proteins in the
dog have been identified by electrophoresis as thyroxine-binding globulin, thyroxine-binding prealbumin, albumin, inter-ex-globulin, and two B-globulin regions. I, 2. n. 101 Alteration
in thyroid hormone-binding protein levels or the availability of binding sites on those
proteins influences TT 4 measurements. If there is an insufficient amount of protein or the
receptors are occupied by other hormones or drugs, the T4 will not bind and will be
rapidly metabolized by the liver. Because fT 4 is not immediately influenced by most of
the disorders that alter protein levels or receptor availability, its levels should be normal in
the euthyroid dog. It has been suggested that the fT4 may be the better test to document
true hypothyroidism in a dog with a drug history or other disorders.l'" It has been
reported that glucocorticoids, phenylbutazone, salicylates, diazepam, primidone, phenytoin,
androgens, and phenobarbital may decrease basal serum TT 4 levels by interfering with
protein binding and that basal serum TT 4 levels may be elevated in pregnancy, in pseudopregnancy, in male dogs with functional Sertoli's cell testicular tumors, and in response to
estrogen therapy, owing to increased protein-binding capacity. I. 2, 11,48, 131. 160
In summary, basal serum levels of TT 4 are Significantly influenced by numerous
conditions that have nothing to do with thyroid disease and hypothyroidism. In the
absence of classic historical, clinical, and clinicopathologic evidence of thyroid hormone
deficiency, low basal serum TT 4 levels must be interpreted cautiously because approximately 20% of euthyroid dogs have low levels at anyone measurement. To support the
diagnosis, additional tests should be performed. To repeat, serum TT 3 levels are a particularly poor measure of thyroid dysfunction. 23,118 Because TT 3 is predominantly an intracellular hormone and is preferentially produced in states of thyroid deficiency, TT 4 levels
drop before TT3 levels. In addition, TT3 levels are more severely affected by nonthyroid
illnesses and drugs and are inconsistently responsive to TSH and TRH stimulation.
Because the concentration of fT 4 appears to determine hormone availability to cells,

786 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
and because total hormone concentrations may change with drugs, illness, and so forth
without a change in fT 4, a direct or an indirect measurement of fT 4 provides a more
consistent laboratory assessment of thyroid status than does the measurement of TT 4. The
standard techniques for measurement of fT 4 are RIA, chemiluminescence, and equilibrium dialysis. Equilibrium dialysis is superior to RIA methods, but one report indicates
that the chemiluminescence test is equivalent in accuracy to equilibrium dialysis.'!" In the
early evaluations of fT4 measured by RIA, between 11% and 20% of hypothyroid dogs
with no confounding illnesses had normal fT 4 levels, whereas 0% to 8% of euthyroid dogs
had low levels.23 • 43. 100. 118 Free-T4 measurements by dialysis or chemiluminescence are
more accurate.
In two independent studies using large numbers of dogs, the sensitivity of fT 4 in the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism was 98% whereas the specificity was either 92% or 93%.89, 124
Those investigators and others80, 117, 165 suggest that measurement of fT 4 may be the Single
most accurate test of thyroid function in the dog. Because some normal dogs and dogs
with other endocrine diseases or nonthyroidal illness'?" have low fT 4 levels, low levels are
not absolutely diagnostic for hypothyroidism,
In normal cats, basal serum TT 3 and TT 4 levels by RIA are reported to range from 15
to 60 ng/dl and 1.5 to 5 p,g/dl, respectively. 1, 2,11 Trbinding serum globulins could not be
found in the cat.1, 2, 11
In dogs, basal serum rT3 levels by RIA are reported to be approximately 100 ng/dl. I, 2
Serum rT3 levels are expected to be elevated in the euthyroid sick syndrome.

SERUM THYROTROPIN DETERMINATION
In humans, the determination of serum TSH levels by RIA is the most sensitive and
reliable indicator of hypothyroidism, often being abnormal for months before basal serum
TT 4 levels and TSH stimulation test results are ahnormal.l- 2. 11 Serum TSH levels should
be elevated in primary hypothyroidism and low to normal in secondary hypothyroidism.
TSH is a species-specific protein that can cross-react with FSH and LH.I64 Assays using
human reagents in dogs are inaccurate,': 2 and tests designed for the dog (cTSH) can vary
depending on the specificity of the antibody used. Normal levels vary with the laboratory,
but values of less than 0.5 ng/ml are typical. TSH levels are not influenced by time of
day, but random fluctuations do occur, so a Single measurement may not be indicative of
the thyroid status of the dog.29 In one study, it was estimated that a dog would have to be
sampled approximately 40 times to get meaningful results.P' Early evaluations of the
cTSH assay were disappointing and were no more predictive of hypothyroidism than
measurement of TT 4.I26, 134 Although some studies showed 100% correlation of cTSH
results with the final diagnosis,72. 73 most showed inconsistent elevation in hypothyroid
dogs and elevations in 10% to 30% of normal dogs. 127
In primary hypothyroidism, TSH levels should increase to stimulate the glands to
produce more hormone.f In secondary or tertiary disease, levels are low. Because the
majority of hypothyroid dogs have primary disease, elevated cTSH levels are to be
expected in most dogs. In a number of recent studies evaluating cTSH, fT4, and/or
TT 4, the sensitivity of cTSH in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism varied from 63% to
87%42.43,89,124.144 whereas the specificity varied from 75% to 93%. In most instances, the
TT 4 or fT 4 performed better, indicating that Single measurements of cTSH are of questionable value.
To increase the discriminating value of cTSH, it has been suggested that the assay be
run in conjunction with a TT 4 or fT 4.42, 43, 89 The TT 4 or fT 4 would have to be low
whereas the cTSH level would have to be elevated before the diagnosis of hypothyroidism
would be acceptable. Because it would be harder for hypothyroid dogs to satisfy these
more stringent requirements, the sensitivity of the testing would decrease but the specificity would increase. Similar increases in specificity have been reported when TT 4 and fT4
are evaluated together."

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 787

PROVOCATIVE THYROID FUNCTION TESTS
To overcome the unreliability of basal hormone measurement levels, various provocative
tests of thyroid function have been developed.l'" There is controversy about the relative
efficiency and accuracy of the various tests. Results are often difficult to compare because
of variation in methods (different products used at different doses, different time intervals
of sampling, and different laboratories performing and interpreting the tests). As mentioned earlier, the availability and/or expense of the hormones used in these tests has
severely curtailed their use.

Thyrotropin Stimulation Test
TSH is a species-specific glycoprotein with a molecular weight of about 28,000 that is
produced by the adenohypophysis.I" The secretion of TSH is stimulated by hypothalamic
TRH and is inhibited by hypothalamic somatostatin, thyroid hormones, glucocorticoids,
dopamine, and stress. Bovine TSH is biologically active in dogs and cats.
The TSH stimulation test has been widely evaluated in dogs and is vastly superior to
the determination of basal blood TI4 and fT 4 levels in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism." A
commonly used procedure for conducting the TSH stimulation test in dogs is as follows:
Serum samples for TI4 determination are collected immediately before and 6 hours after
the intravenous (IV) injection of 0.1 IUlkg or 1 to 2 units/dog!" of bovine TSH. Because
TSH can be frozen in conventional freezers for over 200 days without loss of biological
potency, multiple dogs can be tested from one vial when these low doses are used. Single
or repeated IV injections can rarely produce anaphylaxis." so some investigators use the
subcutaneous route.
Euthyroid dogs usually have pre-TSH serum TI4 levels within or below the normal
pre-TSH range for the laboratory performing the assay, and post-TSH serum TI4 levels
within the normal post-TSH range. Some investigators categorize the response to TSH as
normal when the post-TSH TI4 level increases by some specific amount, even if the postTSH TI4 value does not enter the normal post-TSH TI4 range. The specific increase
expected varies from laboratory to laboratory and cannot be used reliably elsewhere.l'"
The commonly espoused criterion - that euthyroid dogs double their basal serum TI4
levels after TSH stimulation-is unreliable. In general, measuring serum TI3 levels
before and after TSH administration is unreliable and not recommended. Little work has
been done with fT 4.117
The TSH stimulation test usually achieves normal poststimulation serum TI4 levels in
dogs with the euthyroid sick syndrome and drug-related low basal serum TT 4 level.': 2. n,
99, 165 In some cases, especially in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism or dogs being treated
with glucocorticoids, both the pre-TSH and post-TSH serum TI4 levels are below the
expected normal ranges. 95, 120, 158, 207 However, the slope of the response parallels that of
normal dogs. Glucocorticoids have been reported to suppress TRH secretion, suppress
pituitary responsiveness to TRH, suppress TSH secretion, depress serum thyroid hormone-binding protein levels, suppress basal serum TI4 and TI3 levels, inhibit the conversion of TI4 to TT3, and increase serum rT 3 levels.
If a clinician wishes to perform a TSH stimulation test on dogs receiving thyroid
hormone treatment, administration of the thyroid supplement should be stopped for at
least 30 days. Cessation for 60 days may give more reliable results. 1, 2, 104 The TSH
stimulation test can be conducted simultaneously with an ACTH stimulation test or a
dexamethasone suppression test with no compromise in the accuracy of either procedure. 1O,13
In cats, the following two protocols have been reported to be accurate measurements
of thyroid function: (1) serum TI4 determinations before and 6 hours after IV injection of
either 1 IV or 1 IV/kg of bovine TSH70, 146 and (2) serum TI4 determinations before and
10 hours after intramuscular (1M) injection of 2.5 IV of bovine TSH.6

'See references 1, 2, 23, 24, 78, 102, U8.

788 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

Thyrotropin-Releasing Hormone Stimulation Test

TRH is a tripeptide produced by the hypothalamus. 1, 2 TRH stimulates the release of TSH
and prolactm.?" TRH secretion is enhanced by norepinephrine, histamine, serotonin, and
dopamine, and it is probably inhibited by thyroid hormones.
In humans, serum TT 4 and TSH responses to exogenous TRH have been used to
differentiate among primary, secondary, and tertiary hypothyroidism. 1. 2 Patients with primary hypothyroidism have low basal serum TT4 levels and high basal serum TSH levels,
neither of which responds to TRH stimulation. Patients with secondary hypothyroidism
have low basal serum TT 4 and TSH levels, neither of which responds to TRH stimulation.
Patients with tertiary hypothyroidism have low basal serum TT 4 and TSH levels, both of
which respond to TRH stimulation.
A variety of different studies on the accuracy of the TRH stimulation test in separating euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs have been published." This testing can be done in
conjunction with other stimulation tests (e.g., ACTH stimulation test for hyperadrenocorticism) without impact on any test. 88 The TRH is given intravenously and samples are
collected before and 4 or 6 hours after injection. Most authors suggest doses of 0.2 or
0.25 mg, but a dose of 0.05 mg/kg has also been suggested.51. 165 Doses greater than
0.9 mg or greater than 0.1 mg/kg often cause various cholinergic side effects, including
hypersalivation, coughing, miosis, vomiting, diarrhea, urination, tachycardia, and tachypnea.
In the early evaluations of this test, TT 4 levels only were determined. Basal TT 4 levels
are expected to at least double in normal dogs, whereas this should not occur in hypothyroid dogs. When results of the TRH stimulation test were compared with the results of
TSH stimulation tests performed in the same dogs, the TRH results were less predictable
of hypothyroidism; the current sentiment is that the standard TRH stimulation test is not
reliable for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.f': 147 Recent studies have focused on measurement of cTSH in response to TRH administration. In normal dogs, cTSH levels should
increase over 150% after TRH administration, whereas very little change should occur in
hypothyroid dogs.69. 143 This small rate of change indicates that pituitary output of TSH is
already at its maximum. Although this testing can be helpful in some cases, baseline
measurement of cTSH is probably just as accurate.v" Unless further modifications improve the accuracy of the TRH stimulation test, it has little or no use.
In normal cats, serum TT 4 levels were reported to show a reproducible doubling 4
hours after the IV injection of 0.1 mg/kg of TRH.122, 146 TRH doses of 0.1 mg/kg or
greater often produced the cholinergic side effects mentioned earlier for dogs.
THYROID BIOPSY
Primary and secondary canine hypothyroidism can be easily distinguished by histologic
examination of a biopsy specimen of the thyroid. 1, 2, 11 In primary hypothyroidism, there is
massive loss of follicular epithelium, usually associated with lymphocytic thyroiditis." In
secondary hypothyroidism, the follicles are distended with colloid, the follicular epithelium
is flattened, and there is no vacuolation of the colloid. Normal dogs treated with systemic
glucocorticoid have increased numbers of colloid droplets per thyroid follicular cell, suggesting inhibition of thyroid lysosomal hydrolysis of colloid.'! In these dogs, basal serum
TT 3 and TT 4 levels were decreased, but TSH and TRH stimulation test results were
normal.
TESTS USED IN LYMPHOCYTIC THYROIDITIS
In dogs and human patients with lymphocytic thyroiditis, a number of immunologic
evaluations have been conducted, including determination of serum levels of antithyroglobulin antibodies, serum levels of antimicrosomal and anticolloidal antibodies, in vitro
"See references 51, 69, 76, 78, 84, 102, 143, 147, 149,

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 789

lymphocyte blastogenesis to thyroid extract, delayed-type hypersensitivity skin test reactions to thyroid extract, and circulating immune complex levels. I, 2, 30, 34, 55, 79, 161 In dogs,
antithyroglobulin antibodies are demonstrable in more than 50% of cases of naturally
occurring hypothyroidism by means of ELISA, hemagglutination, and indirect immunofluorescence techniques.A 36, 62-64
Antibodies to T4 or T3 also may be detected.w 52,79,130 When present, these autoantibodies cause spurious elevations of the IT4 or IT3 values as measured by RIA.80, 96 The
patient looks either normal or hypothyroid but has IT4 or IT3 levels consistent with
hyperthyroidism. Great Danes, Irish setters, Borzois, Doberman pinschers, and Old English sheepdogs may be predisposed. Interestingly, antithyroglobulin antibodies are also
demonstrable in more than 40% of dogs with nonthyroidal endocrine disorders and
healthy relatives of antibody-positive patients, as well as in 13% of hospitalized patients
without endocrine disease. Screening for antithyroid antibodies may be useful in detecting
family members that might experience hypothyroidism and helping to differentiate primary immune-mediated hypothyroidism (antibody-positive) from secondary and tertiary
hypothyroidism (antibody-negative).

• GLUCOCORTICOIDS
Glucocorticoids are produced by the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex and are
probably the most commonly used therapeutic agents in veterinary medicine. I, 2, 306 Glucocorticoids are bound primarily to a high-affinity corticosteroid-binding globulin (80%) and
serum albumin (10%).213 The remaining 10% is free and metabolically active. Because
most of the receptor sites on the corticosteroid-binding protein are open, cortisol production can increase fivefold before the free fraction increases. Hyperglucocorticoidism may
be produced by hypersecretion of ACTH or ACTH-like substances (ectopic, idiopathic,
functional pituitary neoplasm), hypersecretion of endogenous glucocorticoids (functional
adrenocortical neoplasm), and exogenous glucocorticoid administration (iatrogenic).

Glucocorticoids and the Skin
The skin is a sensitive and specific indicator of hyperglucocorticoidism, reflecting both
internal disease and inappropriate therapy. I, 2, II The protein catabolic, antienzymatic, and
antimitotic effects of glucocorticoids are manifested in numerous ways in dog and cat skin:
(1) the epidermis becomes thinned and hyperkeratotic (because of suppressed deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA] synthesis, decreased mitoses, and keratinization abnormalities), (2) the
basement membrane zone becomes thinned and disrupted, (3) pilosebaceous atrophy
becomes pronounced, (4) the dermis becomes thinned and dermal vasculature becomes
fragile (owing to inhibition of fibroblast proliferation, collagen, and ground substance
production), and (5) wound healing is delayed. Unique to the dog, presumably through
changes in protein structure, collagen and elastin fibers become attractive sites for mineralization, resulting in dystrophic calcinosis cutis."! In chronic cases, cutaneous ossification
can occur.s-' Additionally, owing to the broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of excessive glucocorticoids, patients have increased susceptibility to
bacterial and fungal cutaneous infections. I, 2, II
Clinically, hyperglucocorticoidism in dogs and cats is characterized by (I) thin, hypotonic skin, (2) easy bruising (petechiae and ecchymoses), (3) poor wound healing,
(4) seborrhea sicca, (5) phlebectasias, and (6) increased susceptibility to bacterial infection,
demodicosis, and perhaps dermatophytosis and Malassezia infection. In dogs, calcinosis
cutis, bilaterally symmetric alopecia, easy epilation, comedones, and variable hyperpigmentation are features of hyperglucocorticoidism. In human patients, but not in dogs and cats,
hypertrichosis and cutaneous striae are common features of hyperglucocorticoidism.
Histologically, hyperglucocorticoidism in dogs and cats is characterized by variable
combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, telogenization of hair

790 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame follicles), thin dermis, and telangiectasia.v 16 The follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, epidermal atrophy, epidermal melanosis,

sebaceous gland atrophy, and dystrophic mineralization that occur in dogs are rare in cats.

Adrenal Function Tests
Adrenal function tests are basically of two types: those that are single measurements of
basal glucocorticoid levels in blood or urine and those that are provocative, dynamicresponse tests. Single measurements of basal glucocorticoid levels, although cheaper and
easier to perform, are unreliable.': 2, 280, 343b Many dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have
elevated basal glucocorticoid levels, but some dogs have normal levels,243 and dogs with
nonadrenal disorders can have elevated levels.186

URINARY GLUCOCORTICOID DETERMINATION
In dogs, the major cortisol metabolites found in urine are cortol, 3-epiallocortol, cortolone,
3-epiallotetrahydrocortisol, and tetrahydrocortisol.' 2. 11 These metabolites are excreted
mainly as glucuronides, and a major portion of this fraction is represented by steroids
reduced at C-20. Thus, the use of steroid assay procedures that measure only those
steroids having a dihydroxyketotic side chain, such as the Porter-Silber reaction, do not
measure these cortisol metabolites in dogs. In cats, virtually all glucocorticoid metabolites
are excreted in bile (99%), with only a small amount of Porter-Silber chromogens present
as the free compounds in urine (1%),1,2, 1,5
Assays of urinary steroids (17-ketosteroids and 17-hydroxycorticosteroids) necessitate
24-hour urine samples, metabolic cages, and collecting equipment; are easily contaminated; and must be performed before and after the administration of a provocative test
agent. They are rarely used today.
The urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio was developed to avoid the need for 24-hour
urine collection and to screen the patient for hyperadrenocorticism.F" 237, 2,56 Normal dogs
have low values (5,7 ± 0,9), whereas dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have high values
(337,6 ± 72), However, values in dogs under stress,320 with renal disease, or with other
disorders can overlap those in dogs with Cushing's disease, so the test is not specific
(positive predictive value, 87%),236 Because values are not normal in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, this ratio can be a useful screening test to exclude that diagnosis (negative
predictive value, 100%),

BLOOD CORTISOL DETERMINATION
Blood cortisol levels in dogs and cats have been measured by three methods: fluorometry,
competitive protein binding, and RIA.1, 2 RIA is the method of choice and the one in
general use. Basal blood cortisol levels by RIA in normal dogs and cats are approximately
o to 8 ILg/dl,l, 2 but the normal values established for the laboratory performing the
testing should always be used. Serum or plasma can be used in the testing, and freezing is
unnecessary provided samples reach the laboratory within 8 days and are kept cold
(< 20°C).11, 2,5 Most investigators separate the serum or plasma as quickly as possible and
freeze it until the assay is performed.
Important considerations when interpreting blood cortisol levels include the following:
(1) different laboratories may vary in their normal and abnormal values, (2) stress and
nonadrenal illness can markedly elevate blood cortisol levels, (3) cortisol levels can vary
with the patient's age, (4) episodic cortisol secretion occurs in normal dogs and dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism, and (5) single measurements of blood cortisol are of limited value
in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism." Although early data suggested rhythmic variation in cortisol secretion in dogs and cats,1, 2, 11 it is now generally thought that these

'See references 1, 2, 11, 12, 183, 186, 212. 298.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 791

species show little or no circadian variation in plasma concentrations of ACTH or cortisol.246 These hormones appear to be secreted in an episodic baseline with 8 to 16 peaks
per day.

CORTISOL RESPONSE TESTS
To overcome the unreliability of basal blood cortisol levels, various provocative tests have
been developed. I, 2, 280. 343b Because some dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have an altered
clearance of ACTH and dexamethasone-'? or may have low circulating cortisol levels.F" no
one test is absolutely diagnostic and all results must be evaluated in light of the patient's
signs. Cortisol response tests are traditionally begun at 8 to 10 AM.

Corticotropin (ACTH) Stimulation Test
ACTH is a polypeptide with a molecular weight of about 4500 secreted by the adenohypophysis as part of a large prohormone, pro-opiomelanocortin, which also contains in its
sequence B-lipotropin, B-endorphin, enkephalins, and a-MSH.I, 2, 246
The ACTH stimulation test (ACTH response test) reliably documents a diagnosis of
hypoadrenocorticism or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. Basal blood
cortisol levels are normal or low and show little or no response to ACTH. In addition, the
ACTH stimulation test is useful for monitoring therapeutic response to adrenosuppressive
treatments.sw 273 Two commonly used protocols for ACTH stimulation are as follows:
(1) plasma or serum cortisol samples collected before and 2 hours after the 1M injection
of 2.2 IV/kg of ACTH gel or (2) plasma or serum cortisol samples collected before and 1
hour after the IV or 1M injection of synthetic ACTH (Cortrosyn).224 The ACTH gel is
currently difficult to obtain. The synthetic product is packaged in single-dose vials of
0.25 mg. Conventionally, the whole vial was administered. In many animals, this 0.25-mg
dose was well above the 5 JLg/kg needed to maximally stimulate the dog's adrenal
glands. 248, 330 Because the product's bioavailability is maintained for 4 months in the
refrigerator or for 6 months in the conventional freezer (-20°C), many investigators
subdivide the vial and give only what is needed.l71, 248 The ACTH stimulation test can be
performed concurrently with the TSH stimulation test while maintaining the accuracy of
both tests.!? 13
In many of the older texts and papers, the ACTH stimulation test was considered
inferior to the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test for the diagnosis of spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism in the dog." This assessment was based on the fact that about 15%
of cases with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism do not have an exaggerated response to ACTH administration; about 50% of cases with an adrenocortical tumor hyperresponded; and chronically ill or stressed animals can have elevated basal cortisol levels
and may hyperrespond to ACTH. As was discussed in the thyroid testing section, more
current methods of evaluation give the raw data and the sensitivity, specificity, and
possibly the positive predictive value of the test. The positive predictive value is the
probability that the positive test result was correct.
In one study comparing the accuracy of the ACTH stimulation test versus the lowdose dexamethasone suppression test in 40 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (30 with
pituitary-dependent disease, 10 with adrenal tumor) and 41 normal dogs, the sensitivities
of both tests were nearly identical, 95% and 96%, respectively, but the specificity of the
low-dose dexamethasone test was 76%, resulting in a positive predictive value of 76%. The
ACTH stimulation test was more specific (91%), with a positive predictive value of 91%.318
In another study on 20 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease, 59 dogs with non adrenal
disease, and 21 normal dogs, the positive predictive values for the ACTH stimulation test
and low-dose dexamethasone suppression test were lower, 67% and 38%, respectively, but
the ACTH stimulation test was superior.P? Sensitivity and specificity data also was poorer.
The poorer performance of both of these tests was due to the inclusion of the 59 dogs

·See references 183, 212, 235, 256, 272, 273, 280, 333, 343b.

792 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
with nonadrenal disease. About 35% had significantly elevated baseline cortisol levels, and
38% and 56% failed to show adequate suppression to dexamethasone at 4 or 8 hours,
respectively. Eight dogs (14%) had abnormal ACTH response test results. Both of these
and other studies validate the use of the ACTH stimulation test but highlight the need for
careful evaluation of the results.
The ACTH stimulation test has been studied in normal cats and in a small number of
cats with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism." Two protocols recommended for cats are as
follows: (1) plasma or serum cortisol determinations before and 90 minutes after the 1M
injection of 2.2 IUlkg of ACTH gel and (2) plasma or serum cortisol determinations
before and 90 minutes after the IV injection of 0.125 mg of synthetic ACTH. Other
investigators reported no difference in the response of the healthy cats to 0.125 mg or
0.250 mg of synthetic ACTH 1M (peak cortisol responses at 30 minutes after injectionl."?
It was reported that cats with diabetes mellitus may hyperrespond to ACTH,281 but
another study failed to document this finding in diabetic and nondiabetic sick cats. 343

Low-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to confirm the diagnosis of spontaneous canine hyperadrenocorticism'!' 2, 235, 256, 272, 280, 343b In normal dogs, the low dose of
dexamethasone consistently suppresses blood cortisol levels to less than 1 p,g/dl for the 8hour test period. The definition of suppression varies, but most investigators think that a
reduction in the blood cortisol level to below 1.5 p,g/dl or to less than 50% of the resting
level indicates suppression. A commonly used protocol for the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test is to take plasma or serum cortisol samples before and 4 and 8 hours
after the IV administration of 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasone. The dexamethasone suppression test has been performed concurrently with the TSH stimulation test while preserving
the accuracy of both tests.l" 13
As mentioned in the discussion of the ACTH stimulation test, the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test can be equally or more specific than the ACTH stimulation test
but has a much lower specificity and positive predictive value in both normal dogs and
dogs with nonadrenal disease.P" 206, 218, 239, 242, 318 The test performs much more poorly in
dogs with nonadrenal disease because (1) they have an accelerated clearance of dexamethasone, (2) they have a receptor insensitivity, or (3) their chronic illness has resulted in
Significant adrenocortical hyperplasia. As with all other tests, the results of the low-dose
dexamethasone suppression test must be interpreted in light of the patient's clinical signs
and not just accepted at face value. I, 2
The dexamethasone suppression test has been studied in a few normal cats and cats
with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism.v" 270, 281, 3lO, 343b One group of investigators reported that plasma cortisol responses of healthy cats to IV injections of dexamethasone at
doses of 0.01 mg/kg, 0.1 mg/kg, and 1 mg/kg were similar (with peak suppression at 6 to
10 hours after injectionj.P? It was reported that the results of dexamethasone suppression
testing were not different in normal, diabetic, and nondiabetic sick cats. 343

High-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to differentiate between pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism and that caused by the adrenocortical neoplasia in
dogs. I, 2, 235, 256, 272, 280, 343c Because high-dose dexamethasone should cause suppression in
both normal dogs and most dogs with pituitary-dependent disease, this test cannot be
used to confirm the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism. The definition of suppression
varies, but most investigators think that a reduction in the blood cortisol level to below 1.5
p,g/dl or to less than 50% of the resting level indicates suppression. A commonly used
protocol for the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test is to take plasma or serum
cortisol samples before and 4 and 8 hours after the IV injection of 0.1 mg/kg of dexamethasone. Some investigators recommended a much higher dose, 1 mg/kg. 280 Although
"See references 1, 2, 11, 279, 281, 283, 284, 310, 342, 343b.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 793

this larger dose increases the expense of the test, it does not clearly enhance the diagnostic accuracy of the test. I. 2. 240 In fact, it has been suggested that the 1 mg/kg dose was less
reliable than the 0.1 mg/kg dose.'} 240
Not all dogs with pituitary-dependent disease experience suppression in the expected
fashion.240. 280, 325 In a large study of 181 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease and 35
dogs with an adrenal tumor, suppression did not occur in 46 (25%) of the dogs with
pituitary-dependent disease. Suppression did occur in 2 (6%) of the dogs with adrenal
tumors.P" The dogs with pituitary-dependent disease in which suppression did not occur
might have had a tumor in the intermediate lobe, an area typically unresponsive to bloodborne ACTH and dexamethasone.P'?

PLASMA CORTICOTROPIN (ACTH) DETERMINATION
Plasma ACTH levels have been measured by RIA in normal dogs and in dogs with
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. I. 2, II, 241, 256, 272, 280, 291, 333, 343c Endogenous plasma
ACTH levels are extremely useful in determining the cause of spontaneous canine hyperadrenocorticism, especially when interpreted together with the results of dexamethasone
suppression testing. Plasma ACTH levels range from normal to elevated (greater than 40
pg/ml) in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and range from low to
undetectable (less than 20 pg/ml) in dogs with functional adrenocortical neoplasms. As is
the case with plasma cortisol levels, plasma ACTH levels fluctuate episodically throughout
the day, which results in some overlap of values between normal dogs and dogs with
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. Plasma ACTH levels have been measured by RIA in
normal cats and are reported to be approximately 20 to 100 pg/ml. l , 2, 269-281, 342, 343c Plasma
ACTH levels were markedly elevated in one cat with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Accurate determination of plasma ACTH necessitates proper collection and handling
of the specimen and a carefully performed, difficult RIA technique. Conventionally, blood
for ACTH assay was collected in heparin-containing or ethylenediaminetetra-aceticcontaining plastic tubes and spun within 90 minutes at 4°C (39,2°F). The plasma must be
promptly separated into plastic or polypropylene tubes and kept frozen until assayed. If
aprotinin, a proteinase inhibitor, is added to the collection tubes, the separated and
refrigerated (but unfrozen) plasma will not undergo any decrease in ACTH concentration
provided that it reaches the laboratory within 4 days.247 At - 20°C (-4°F), the ACTH
concentration of samples is maintained for only 30 days, so the assay must be performed
quickly.225

CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR STIMULATION TEST
CRF is a peptide secreted in pulsatile fashion by the hypothalamus. I, 2, 185 CRF secretion
is stimulated by epinephrine and serotonin, and it is inhibited by glucocorticoids and
serotonin antagonists (e.g. cyproheptadine).
The isolation and synthesis of CRF makes possible an additional diagnostic test to
differentiate the two causes of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. I, 2, 241, 280, 285, 343c Synthetic ovine CRF was injected intravenously (0.1, 1, or 10 J,tg/kg) into normal dogs and
produced peak plasma ACTH and cortisol levels within 30 to 60 minutes.P" Preliminary
information indicates that the CRF stimulation test is useful for distinguishing between
canine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (increased levels of ACTH and cortisol)
and adrenocortical neoplasia (no responsel."? However, until a relatively inexpensive,
Single-dose, sterilized CRF preparation becomes available, the CRF stimulation test is of
limited usefulness to most veterinarians.

OTHER ADRENAL FUNCTION TESTS
Attempts have been made to devise more foolproof, inexpensive, and time-efficient adrenal function tests for the dog and the cat. Tests evaluated include (1) the metyrapone

794 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
response test, (2) the lysine-vasopressin test, (3) the insulin response test, (4) the glucagon
response test, and (5) a combination of the ACTH response and dexamethasone suppression tests.': 2, ll, 197, 200, 201 However, these tests are inferior to the standard ACTH stimulation and dexamethasone suppression tests and cannot be recommended,

• GROWTH HORMONE
GH (somatotropin) is a polypeptide (molecular weight about 22,000) produced by the
adenohypophysis,"- 2 It has diametrically opposed intrinsic anabolic and catabolic activities,
Its catabolic activity (enhanced lipolysis and restricted glucose transport caused by insulin
resistance) is caused directly by the GH polypeptide, whereas its anabolic activity is
mediated by somatomedins (insulin-like growth factors), which are primarily generated by
the liver and controlled by GH.346, 354, 355 The major function of GH is hormonal control of
growth (in concert with thyroid hormones, insulin, cortisol, and sex steroids). GH is also
important for the development of the thymus and T-cell function.'?" 371
The secretion of GH is episodic and labile; it is affected by the sleep-wake cycle,
physical activity, the animal's nutritional state, physical and emotional stress, and pregnancy.l, 2 In a study of 500 normal dogs, pulsatile GH secretion was found during a 24hour period.P'? About 30% of the dogs did not respond to clonidine and xylazine provocation, probably because the agents were administered in the postsecretory refractory period
when the pituitary would not respond to further stimulation. Various neurotransmittersnorepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin - as well as hypoglycemia, various amino acids,
and progestogens stimulate GH secretion.
No significant changes occurred in the concentrations of GH in whole blood held at
room temperature (20° to 22°C) or in refrigeration (4°C) for 24 hours; in plasma held at
room temperature or in refrigeration for 8 days; or in plasma that went through four
freeze/thaw cycles."!
Excessive GH secretion produces acromegaly.P': 365, 375, 377 The skin becomes thickened, is myxedematous, and is thrown into exaggerated folds. These changes are most
obvious on the face and the extremities. Hypertrichosis is common, Hyperpigmentation
occurs in about 40% of human patients with acromegaly but has not been reported in
dogs.'! Histologically, acromegalic skin is characterized by increased dermal collagen and
mucin and by hyperplasia of the epidermis and the appendages." 16,375
In dogs, juvenile GH deficiency results in retention of the puppy coat, followed by
bilaterally symmetric alopecia and hyperpigmentation, and by thin, hypotonic skinY, 355
Hyposomatotropism in the mature dog yields similar cutaneous findings, but the dog has a
normal adult coat before the hair loss starts. 355, 359, 373, 376 Histologically, both entities are
characterized by variable combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis,
follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal
keratinization (flame follicles), epidermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy, thin dermis,
and decreased to absent elastin fibers in chronically affected dogs.v 16
Specific RIA techniques for measuring canine GH have been developed.v- 355, 376 Basal
GH levels in normal dogs and cats are approximately 1 to 4.5 ng/ml.'- 2, ll, 347, 355, 376
Neither breed nor sex causes variation in normal levels, but age has a profound effect.
Dogs younger than 1 year have approximately double the levels in dogs older than 1
year. 347 Young dogs also have a twofold to fourfold greater increase in poststimulation GH
levels as compared with mature dogs. Basal GH levels in pituitary dwarfs and hypophysectomized dogs may approximate these values as well. Thus, basal GH levels are inadequate
for the documentation of GH deficiency.
To document GH deficiency, stimulation tests must be performed. 1, 2, ll, 361, 372 Clonidine hydrochloride (Catapres), an a-adrenergic and antihypertensive drug, has been used
to stimulate GH release in dogs. Normal dogs showed a marked increase in plasma GH
and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-l) levels within 15 to 30 minutes after IV injection of
20 to 30 JLg/kg of clonidine, whereas no response occurred in pituitary dwarfs and
hypophysectomized dogs. Because some normal dogs show no response to clonidine or

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 795

xylazine provocation.P'" this test cannot be considered diagnostic for GH deficiency. Clonidine may cause severe hypotension and shoek.!' Xylazine (Rompun), a sedative hypnotic
drug, gives similar results when injected intravenously at 100 to 300 J-tg/kg. The 300 J-tg/
kg xylazine dose may cause severe hypotension and shock in toy and miniature breeds of
dogs.'! More recently, testing with synthetic human or bovine GH-RF has been suggested. 344 . 359 Either product is injected intravenously at 1 J-tg/kg, with sampling at 0, 15,
and 30 minutes. Side effects have not been reported. Proper interpretation of GH levels
also necessitates the assessment of thyroid and adrenal gland function. I. 2, 355, 376 Both
hyperglucocorticoidism and hypothyroidism impair GH secretion. In addition, pseudopregnancy, progestogen therapy, and sex hormone imbalances can cause elevation of basal
plasma GH levels and poor response to xylazine.
In acromegaly, basal plasma GH levels have been markedly elevated, ranging from
11 to 1476 ng/m1.354 , 365, .375, 377 A hallmark of acromegaly is the nonsuppressibility of
plasma GH levels during the administration of an IV glucose load. In canine acromegaly,
plasma GH levels were not suppressed by the IV administration of 1 g of glucose per
kilogram, 1,2,354
Somatomedins are polypeptides (molecular weight, 5000 to 10,000) that can also be
quantitated by RIA to assess GH status indirectly. I, 2, 354-359 Insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-l) is most commonly assayed. IGF-l plasma levels parallel body size in dogs; normal
values for Cocker spaniels are 5 to 90 ng/ml as opposed to 230 to 330 ng/ml for normal
German shepherds. IGF-l production is impaired by glucocorticoids and estrogens, and
levels are expected to be low or undetectable in GH-deficient states and elevated in
acromegaly. Values have been normal in some dogs with presumed adult-onset hyposomatotropism. 359 , 368

• SEX HORMONES

Estrogens
Estrogens are present in both male and female animals and are produced by the ovarian
follicles, the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex, and Sertoli's and interstitial cells of the
testicles. I, 2, 418 They may also be made by peripheral aromatization of androgens. Pituitary
FSH stimulates ovarian follicular growth and estrogen production in females and spermatogenesis in males.!' 2 Hypothalamic GnRH stimulates the pituitary to release FSH. In
tum, estrogen inhibits GnRH release, and inhibin (produced by ovarian follicles and
testicular Sertoli's cells) inhibits FSH release.
Estrogens are reported to stimulate epidermal mitosis, to increase epidermal thickness
in mice and humans, and to reduce epidermal thickness in rats and humans.!': 418 Epidermal atrophy was produced in dogs by daily 1M injections of 1 mg of diethylstilbestrol for
400 days.
Estrogens increase skin pigmentation in the guinea pig by increasing both free melanin and melanin within melanocytes, whereas ovariectomy has the opposite effect. I! Cutaneous hyperpigmentation is a feature of clinical dermatoses associated with hyperestrogenism in dogs.
Estrogens reduce both sebaceous gland size and sebum production in rats and humans.'! These effects appear to result from a local action on sebaceous glands rather than
from a feedback suppression of endogenous androgens. The daily 1M injection of 1 mg of
diethylstilbestrol into dogs for 400 days produced marked sebaceous gland atrophy.
Estrogens suppress the initiation of anagen in rats, whereas ovariectomy has the
opposite effect. lI , 418 In addition, the rate of hair growth is greater in spayed female rats
than in intact normal female rats, and estradiol implanted into spayed female or castrated
male rats reduces the growth rate. In dogs, estrogens administered orally, subcutaneously,
intramuscularly, and topically produce alopecia. Bilaterally symmetric alopecia and easily
epilated hair are striking features of clinical dermatoses associated with hyperestrogenism
in dogs. There appears to be regional sensitivity of hair follicles to estrogenic abnormali-

796 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
ties because these dermatoses follow a predictable pattern (see later). Evidence also
suggests that these estrogen-sensitive areas of skin may have increased numbers of estrogen receptors.P"
Estrogens are reported to increase the amount of dermal ground substance in mice
and humans." The daily 1M injection of 1 mg of diethylstilbestrol in dogs for 400 days
reduced the thickness of the subcutis. 386 , 421 Estrogens are also known to affect thymic
function, to enhance antibody production, and to inhibit suppressor T-cell function.P"
Hyperestrogenism is thought to be the cause of two distinctive dermatoses in dogs:
feminization of the male dog with a functional tumor of the testicle and hyperestrogenism
of the intact female dog, Cutaneous changes in these syndromes include (1) bilaterally
symmetric alopecia that begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal regions and
spreads cranially and ventrally, (2) variable hyperpigmentation, (3) a dull, easily epilated
haircoat that fails to regrow after clipping, (4) nipple hypertrophy, (5) pendulous prepuce,
(6) vulvar enlargement, and (7) variable seborrheic skin disease. In male dogs, linear
preputial dermatosis appears to correlate with the presence of hyperestrogenism and
testicular neoplasia, Histologically, both syndromes are characterized by variable combinations of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular
atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization (flame follicles), epidermal melanosis, and sebaceous gland atrophy.': 16
The vast majority of adrenalectomized and ovariectomized dogs maintained on only
mineralocorticoids have normal skin and haircoats, indicating that estrogens or any other
sex steroids are not necessary for normal skin and haircoats in dogs, However, hypoestrogenism has been hypothesized as an etiologic consideration in the estrogen-responsive
dermatosis of spayed female dogs. Clinically, the dermatosis is characterized by (1) bilaterally symmetric alopecia that begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal areas
and spreads cranially and ventrally, and (2) an easily epilated haircoat that fails to regrow
after clipping. Histologically, the dermatosis is characterized by follicular keratosis and
follicular dilatation with telogenization of hair follicles.v 16 In addition, spayed female cats
with feline acquired symmetric alopecia may respond to estrogen replacement therapy,
Assays (RIA) for plasma or serum estrogens are commercially available'!' 2 Most
available assays measure only one type of estrogen (e.g., estradiol or estrone). Because
numerous estrogenic substances are produced in the body, such assays may be unsatisfactory. Thus, one can readily understand why only 50% of the dogs with feminization due to
functional Sertoli's cell neoplasm of the testicle could be shown to have hyperestrogenism
(only estradiol was measured). Additionally, blood estrogen levels, along with the blood
levels of the other sex steroids, fluctuate markedly during the day, necessitating multiple
samples and unrealistic financial considerations.P" Evidence has been presented that suggests that dogs can have so-called cutaneous hyperestrogenism (increased cutaneous estrogen receptors) in the absence of hyperestrogenism-"? Reported values for blood estradiol
in the dog and cat vary with the sex of the animal, whether it is neutered or intact, the
stage of the estrous cycle, and the laboratory used,418
Androgens
Androgens are present in both male and female animals and they are produced by the
interstitial cells of the testicle, by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex, and through
peripheral conversion of other sex steroids. 1. 2, 418 Pituitary LH stimulates androgen secretion by testicular interstitial cells and ovulation and corpus luteum formation and maintenance.'- 2 Hypothalamic GnRH stimulates the pituitary release of LH. In tum, androgens
and progesterone inhibit LH release, and estrogens and androgens (via hypothalamic
aromatization to estrogens) inhibit GnRH release,
Androgens are reported to stimulate epidermal mitosis in mice and rats.P: 418 In
humans, androgens are reported to increase epidermal mitotic activity and cell turnover
time and thickness,
Androgens have no effect on pigmentation in the guinea pig, but are reported to
stimulate pigmentation in specialized areas of the skin, such as the subcostal region of the

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 797
male golden hamster and the scrotum of the ground squirrel.'! In humans, androgens
increase cutaneous pigmentation, especially in sexual skin, apparently owing to increased
melanin synthesis and alteration of the packaging of melanosomes. Men with an androgen
deficiency experience hypopigmentation.
Androgens enlarge the sebaceous glands in rats, rabbits, hamsters, mice, and humans
and increase sebum production in humans and rats.'! In humans, excessive androgens
produce excessively oily skin, whereas androgen deficiency produces dry skin and hair.
The action of androgens involves both an increase in the rate of formation of new
sebaceous cells and an increase in the size of mature cells.
In rats, androgen administration retards the initiation of anagen, whereas gonadectomy enhances it.!' However, neither castration nor treatment with testosterone has any
effect on the rate of hair growth in rats. In humans, an excess of androgens results in
accelerated hair growth, whereas androgen deficiency in men causes the hair to become
sparse. 395
Androgens are reported to increase the relative and total amounts of hyaluronic acid
and dermal ground substance in mice.'! In humans, androgens cause thickening of the
dermis with demonstrable increase in skin collagen content. Androgens also inhibit various
T-cell functions. 399
In the testosterone-responsive dermatosis of male dogs, hypoandrogenism is an etiologic hypothesis, The dermatosis is characterized by (1) bilaterally symmetric alopecia that
begins in the perineal, genital, and ventral abdominal areas and spreads cranially and
ventrally, (2) a dull, dry, easily epilated haircoat that fails to grow after clipping, (3) thin
hypotonic skin, and (4) seborrhea sicca. Alteration in coat color occurs in some dogs.
Histologically, the dermatosis is characterized by orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal
atrophy, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, sebaceous gland atrophy, and
thin dermis.v 16 In addition, castrated male cats with feline acquired symmetric alopecia
may respond to testosterone replacement therapy. Conversely, hyperandrogenism is presumed to be the cause of seborrhea oleosa in oversexed intact male dogs, and the
condition resolves with castration.!' Hyperandrogenism has also been demonstrated in
intact male animals with hyperplasia of the circumanal glands and the tail gland. 419
Normal cats treated with mibolerone became virilized, showing thickening of the skin of
the neck and clitoral hypertrophy. 1. 2
Assays (RIA) for plasma or serum androgens are commercially available and are
accompanied by the same interpretational, financial, and practical considerations as previously mentioned for estrogen assays. Values for blood testosterone in normal male dogs
and cats are approximately 0.5 to 6 ng/ml, whereas those in normal female dogs and cats
are usually less than 0.5 ng/m1,l,2, 11, 17,409,418

Progesterone
Progesterone is present in both male and female animals, and it is produced by the
corpus luteum of the ovary and by the zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex. 1, 2, 409, 418 The
effects of progestational compounds on the skin have not been well studied. However,
with the use of these compounds (e.g., megestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate) for the management of feline and canine skin disorders, the clinician must be alerted
to some possible cutaneous side effects.
Progesterone is known to have immunosuppressive action, and various progesterone
analogs are known to have glucocorticoid activity.1, 2, 11,323, 399 Progestational compounds
have also been shown to bind to the intracellular cytosol receptor for dihydrotestosterone
and to inhibit the enzyme 5-a-reductase, which converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. By binding androgen receptors in multiple tissues, progestational compounds may be
androgenic, synandrogenic, or antiandrogenic, depending on the compound and the dose.
In the skin, topically applied progesterone was shown to suppress the sebum excretion
rate Significantly in women.'! Medroxyprogesterone was reported to delay wound healing
in rabbits. In the cat, subcutaneous injections of medroxyprogesterone acetate may produce local alopecia, atrophy, and pigmentary disturbances, and oral megestrol acetate

798 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

administration can produce generalized cutaneous atrophy, alopecia, xanthomas, and poor
wound healing. Bilateral flank alopecia was reported in a dog with hyperprogesteronemia
and a testicular Sertoli's cell neoplasm.P"
Assays (RIA) for plasma or serum progesterone are commercially available and are
burdened by the same interpretational, financial, and practical considerations as previously
mentioned for estrogen assays. Values for blood progesterone in female dogs and cats are
approximately less than 5 ng/ml (in anestrus, estrus, and proestrus) and 10 to 50 ng/ml (in
metestrus and pregnancy), and they are approximately less than 1 ng/ml in male dogs and
cats.1, 2, 418

Sex Hormone Function Tests
As is the case with other endocrine tests, basal measurements of serum sex hormone
levels can give misleading results, especially in intact dogs. Although stimulation tests with
hCG391 or GnRH4°O to evaluate reproductive performance are available, their value in dogs
with gonadal or adrenal sex hormone dermatoses is largely unknown. To date, the testing
that has received widest attention in these conditions is the sex hormone ACTH response
as offered by the Endocrinology Laboratory at the University of Tennessee, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, TN 37901-107l,374 Dogs are given either synthetic ACTH
(0.5 IV/kg IV) or repository ACTH (2.2 mg/kg 1M), and serum samples are collected
before injection and again at 1 hour (synthetic ACTH) or 2 hours (gel ACTH) after
injection. Samples are separated immediately, frozen, and mailed frozen to the laboratory
by overnight mail. In addition to cortisol determinations, the laboratory measures prestimulation and poststimulation levels of progesterone, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, androstenedione, testosterone, and estradiol-17B. Normal values are
available for all hormones for intact or neutered male or female animals. The laboratory
should be contacted before testing to make sure the protocol has not changed.

Gonadotropins and Prolactin
The gonadotropins, FSH (follitropin, molecular weight about 32,000) and LH (lutropin,
molecular weight about 30,000), are produced by the adenohypophysis. 1, 2 Gonadotropin
secretion is stimulated by hypothalamic GnRH and inhibited by estrogens, glucocorticoids,
and androgens (via aromatization to estrogens in the hypothalamus). FSH secretion is also
inhibited by inhibin from the ovarian follicle and testicular Sertoli's cells. LH secretion is
inhibited by progestogens and androgens. In normal dogs and cats, serum FSH levels by
RIA are reported to be approximately 40 to 70 ng/ml (higher in females in proestrus).
Serum LH levels by RIA in normal dogs and cats are reported as follows: 0 to 3 ng/ml in
intact male animals, 6 to 10 ng/ml in female animals in estrus, and less than 2 ng/ml in
female animals in metestrus or anestrus. 1, 2 Gonadotropin deficiencies were detected with
hypothalamic or pituitary disorders.
Prolactin is a polypeptide (molecular weight, - 22,500) produced by the adenohypophysis. Prolactin secretion is episodic and labile; it is stimulated by one or more
hypothalamic releasing factors (including TRH) and inhibited by hypothalamic dopamine.
In normal dogs and cats, serum prolactin levels by RIA are reported to be approximately
1 to 10 ng/ml.! 2 Hyperprolactinemia was found with hypothyroidism, pituitary neoplasms,
and certain drug administrations (phenothiazines, cimetidine), resulting in galactorrhea,
gynecomastia, and inhibition of FSH or LH secretion.

• CLINICAL ASPECTS OF ENDOCRINE SKIN DISEASES
Canine Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease, Cushing's syndrome) is a common disorder of
the dog associated with excessive endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids and is classi-

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 799
cally characterized by polyuria and polydipsia, bilaterally symmetric alopecia, thin hypotonic skin, and skeletal muscle wasting. More than 50% of cases have nontraditional
clinical findings." 14, 333, 334

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Canine hyperadrenocorticism may occur naturally or may be iatrogenic.1, 2, 235, 280, 343a The
naturally occurring type typically is associated with bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. In
a small number of dogs, the hyperadrenocorticism is due to both adrenal and pituitary
neoplasia.P? Iatrogenic canine hyperadrenocorticism results from the misuse of exogenous
glucocorticoids,232
In about 80% to 85% of dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism, the disorder results from excessive pituitary ACTH secretion, which produces bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia (pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism). This excessive ACTH secretion arises from either microadenomas or macroadenomas of the anterior pituitary
gland. 180. 182, 199, 235, 246, 278, 280 Despite the high frequency of disease in certain breeds, the
pituitary tumors appear to arise spontaneously with no genetically coded predisposition.P'
Approximately 90% of the pituitary tumors are functional, and large tumors cause neurologic signs in over 50% of patients.P'" The tumor can be found in either the pars distalis
or the pars intermedia.F'- 180, 181, 246 ACTH secretion from the pars distalis is regulated by
CRH and cortisol, whereas intermediate lobe secretion is regulated by tonic inhibition by
primarily dopamine. It is estimated that upward of 30% of the pituitary tumors are
located in the pars intermedia.Fv 1BO. 300. 312 Large pituitary tumors tend to secrete more
ACTH than smaller ones, and the large ones, especially those of the intermediate lobe,
are most resistant to stimulation by CRH or to dexamethasone suppression.Fv 253. 314, 322
Canine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism has also been associated with pituitary adenocarcinomas. Except with large tumors, there appears to be no direct correlation
among the size of the pituitary neoplasm, the degree of bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia, and the severity of the clinical signs. The hypersecretion of ACTH results in bilateral
adrenocortical hyperplasia that may be diffuse, nodular, or both. The zona glomerulosa is
usually normal in width and histologic appearance, and enlargement is due to hyperplasia
of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis, In some cases, gross enlargement of the
adrenals is absent. The adrenal cortex may be grossly and histologically normal but
functionally abnormal,
Functional (cortisol-producing) adrenocortical neoplasms account for about 15% to
20% of the cases of naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism. A threefold higher
incidence of adrenal neoplasia in females has been demonstrated in one study.P' They
may be adenocarcinomas or adenomas and can occur in either gland. Older data suggested a higher frequency of occurrence in the right adrenal, but newer studies show no
clear-cut predilection for one gland over the other.F" 288, 291, 326 These neoplasms are
thought to function autonomously, producing excessive amounts of cortisol, which results
in negative feedback suppression of CRF (hypothalamus) and ACTH (pituitary) and in
atrophy of the contralateral adrenal gland. Adrenocortical adenocarcinomas tend to be
large, often extending into the adrenal vein and caudal vena cava, and they usually
metastasize to the liver, lung, kidney, and lymph nodes. Dogs with bilateral adrenocortical
adenomas or carcinomas have been reported rarely.208 Intercurrent pheochromocytomas
can also be found, and these dogs respond poorly to treatment.Fv 324
By far, the most alarming cause of canine hyperadrenocorticism is the injudicious use
of glucocorticoids for therapeutic purposes.Pv 306 Although iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism appears to be less common than the 50% incidence rate cited in the past, it still is a
problem for clinicians and pet owners, Long-term steroid use, whether by mouth,266. 306
via injection,244, 259, 306 or topically (eyes,l96, 214, 264, 268, 295 ears,264 or skin 341) can produce
adrenocortical suppression, elevated levels of hepatic enzymes, and iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.

800 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

CLINICAL FEATURES
Naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism is a disease of middle-aged and older
dogs, but cases occur in young dogs. No definitive sex predilection has been documented,
but many studies show a slightly higher frequency in female dogs. 272. 280. 333 Traditionally,
Boxers, Boston terriers, Poodles, and Dachshunds are predisposed, but all breeds, even
dogs of mixed breeding, can be affected. The occurrence of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism in related Dachshunds.P'' Dandie Dinmont terriers.P'" and Yorkshire terriers'P'
reinforces the concept of breed predisposition. Iatrogenic canine hyperadrenocorticism
knows no age, sex, or breed predilection. It occurs most commonly in dogs with chronic
pruritus because they are more likely to receive long-term systemic corticosteroids.
The clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism are many and varied. Although some findings may be caused by the compressive or invasive effects of a pituitary or adrenal tumor,
most signs are a direct result of excessive levels of cortisol and possibly other adrenal
steroids. The signs at presentation depend on the dog's age and body size, the owner's
power of observation, and the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism. Smaller breeds tend to
have more classic and greater numbers of clinical signs than large breeds.l'" Old dogs are
more sensitive to the catabolic effects of glucocorticoids and tend to experience signs
more rapidly and markedly compared with younger dogs. Breeders and others with a keen
interest in their dog's skin may detect subtle changes in the coat and present the dog for
those changes before other signs have developed. At the other end of the spectrum is the
dog owner who pays little attention to the animal and presents the animal only when the
disease, and therefore the signs, are well advanced. In dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism resulting from pituitary adenomas or loss of feedback control, signs
tend to develop gradually, whereas the rate of occurrence can be more rapid and unpredictable with pituitary adenocarcinomas or adrenal tumors.
Polyuria and polydipsia (> 100 mllkg/day of water intake) are commonly the initial
signs of hyperadrenocorticism and can precede easily recognized cutaneous changes by 6
to 12 months. Incidence figures vary from 32% to 82%.241. 280 Concomitant with the
polyuria and polydipsia, varying degrees of polyphagia develop in approximately 50% of
affected dogs. In some chronic cases we have seen, the earliest sign of hyperadrenocorticism is apparently spontaneous improvement in the dog's allergies.
Cutaneous changes occur in most cases of hyperadrenocorticism, but not all are
recognized by casual inspection of the skin. The most common change occurs in the coat.
Early on, the coat loses its luster and healthy appearance and is more difficult to groom
(Fig. lO-lA). Some Poodle owners comment that grooming appointments could be
skipped because the hair was not growing as fast as normally. With time, hairs are lost,
resulting in hypotrichosis to alopecia (see Fig. 1O-1B and C). In most cases, the hair loss
is symmetric and involves the trunk, sparing the head and distal extremities, but patchy
hair loss or involvement of only the flank region 14 (see Fig. 10-30) or the face 332 can also
occur. In one study of 60 dogs, 8 (13.3%) had nontruncal alopecia of the legs (see Fig.
1O-1D) or face. 333 Short-coated dogs, in particular, tend to have a thinned or moth-eaten
coat (see Fig. 1O-1E).
Coat color change can occur as the initial cutaneous sign in some dogs. Black hairs
tum auburn or rust colored and brown hairs lighten to tan or blonde (see Fig. 1O-1F).
This change in pigmentation can involve the entire length of the hair shaft or only the
distal portions. In the latter case, the color change appears to be due to solar bleaching
because the hairs are not shed as rapidly as normally. Uniform color change appears to be
mediated by sex hormones. In our experience, coat color change with few other signs of
hyperadrenocorticism is indicative of a gonadal sex hormone imbalance or adrenal neoplasia, especially adenocarcinomas. Clitoral hypertrophy (see Fig. 1O-1G) is another strong
indicator of an adrenal tumor.
Other cutaneous signs include thin, hypotonic skin (mimics dehydration, tends to
wrinkle) (see Fig. 1O-1E), hyperpigmentation, easy bruising (petechiae and ecchymoses),
phlebectasias (see Fig. 1O-1H), seborrhea (dry or greasy), comedones (Fig. 1O-2A), poor
wound healing, bacterial pyoderma (see Fig. 10-2B), calcinosis cutis (see Fig. 1O-2C and

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 80 I

FIGURE 10-1. Hyperadrenocorticism. A, Soft-coated Wheaten terrier with an unmanageable coat. B, Marked
truncal hypotrichosis and hyperpigmentation. C, Toy Poodle showing typical advanced alopecic pattern and hyperpigmented skin. This dog regrew a good haircoat with o,p'-DDD treatment. D, Distal extremity hair loss. E, Hypotrichotic and hypotonic skin. F, Generalized coat color change in a German shorthaired pointer. (Courtesy of R. Long.)
G, Clitoral hypertrophy associated with an adrenal tumor. H, Phlebectasia.

802 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-2. Hyperadrenocorticism. A, Comedones, alopecia, and potbelly. B, Severe facial furunculosis in a
dog with Cushing's disease. C, Calcinosis cutis on the ventral abdomen. D, Calcinosis cutis along the caudal dorsum.
E, Stria with focal ulceration. F, Thin, hypotonic skin with a central wrinkle, prominent vasculature, and a few
petechiae in a cat with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism. G, Hypotrichosis with scaling in a cat. H, Large traumatic
wound in a cat with hyperadrenocorticism. (Courtesy of R. Rosychuk.)

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 803

FIGURE 10-3. Cutaneous ossification over the dorsum of a dog
with chronic iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. A bone saw was
needed to take the biopsy samples.

D), and striae (see Fig. 1O-2E). The striae may occur spontaneously or be the result of
remodeling of a previous scar. In chronic cases, the calcinosis cutis persists and cutaneous
ossification (Fig. 10-3) can occur.v! Demodicosis (Fig. 10-4) may be a secondary confounding problem in more than 5% of cases.!! 333 The older veterinary literature gives
incidence figures for most of these conditions, figures that can be different from those
generated today. For example, a study done in the 1980s on 300 dogs280 reported comedones in 34% of the dogs, whereas a more recent study on 60 dogs showed a 5%
incidence rate. 333 These disparate results do not mean that the signs of hyperadrenocorticism are changing but rather that most cases are diagnosed and treated earlier before the
classic cluster of changes occurs.F"
The skin infections in hyperadrenocorticism typically occur in the hypotrichotic to

FIGURE 10-4. Adult-onset pedal
demodicosis in a cushingoid dog.

804 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
alopecic areas, but some dogs do not have other skin lesions. Typically, the infection is
follicular, but large, nonfollicular superficial pustules (bullous impetigo) with minimal
inflammation may occur. The infections in these dogs respond poorly to treatment or
recur shortly after treatment is discontinued. In cases in which the response to antibiotics
is poor, multiple deep skin scrapings should be performed to check for demodicosis.
Calcinosis cutis occurs in up to 40% of cases, but the incidence in cases presented early is
much lower (1.7% to 8%).333 It occurs most commonly over the dorsal neck, on the rump,
and in the axillary and inguinal regions (see Fig. 1O-2C and D). Early lesions are firm,
whitish dermal papules to plaques. With time, the overlying skin reddens, ulcerates, and
crusts. Old lesions can resemble pyoderma or pyotraumatic dermatitis and are often
pruritic. Other causes of pruritus in hyperadrenocorticism are bacterial pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, seborrhea, and demodicosis.
Cutaneous phlebectasias occur in up to 40% of the dogs with hyperadrenocorticism,
especially over the ventrum and medial thighs. 308 These vascular lesions are macular to
papular, are erythematous, range up to 6 mm in diameter, are asymptomatic, and generally do not blanch with diascopy (see Fig. 10-IH). These lesions do not regress after
effective treatment. Pressure sores (decubital ulcers) are common in large dogs with
hyperadrenccorticism.f
Musculoskeletal abnormalities are common in canine hyperadrenocorticism. 1, 2. 272, 273
Lethargy and decreased exercise tolerance are common. Skeletal muscle atrophy and
weakness occur, with atrophy being most pronounced over the head, shoulders, thighs,
and pelvis, Abdominal enlargement (potbelly) is frequent (see Fig, 10-2A), with the
abdomen being flaccid and the dog not being able to tense the abdomen normally. In
addition, a cushingoid myotonia or pseudomyotonia may occur, which is characterized by
muscle stiffness and proximal appendicular muscle enlargement, Lameness associated with
osteoporosis and osteomalacia, with or without pathologic fractures, is rare. Chronic hyperadrenocorticism can exaggerate common problems such as anterior cruciate ligament
rupture and patellar luxation.s
Persistent anestrus is frequent in intact bitches with hyperadrenocorticism.e 235. 280, 409
In addition, clitoral enlargement is not uncommon and presumably results from hypersecretion of adrenal androgens.l'" Clitoral enlargement does not occur with iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism. Testicular atrophy is common in intact males.
Respiratory complications reported to occur with canine hyperadrenocorticism include
excessive panting, bronchopneumonia, dystrophic mineralization and fibrosis, and pulmonary thrombosis." 254, 274
Behavioral changes may also occur (aggressiveness, depression, psychoses, and selfmutilation). Neurologic signs, including ataxia, blindness, head pressing, somnolence, Horner's syndrome, anisocoria, circling, hyperesthesias, and seizures, occasionally are apparent
in naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism and are caused by pituitary neoplasia
or metastatic adrenocortical neoplasia. 190, 258. 271. 300 Old dogs with cognitive dysfunction
have a higher frequency of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) dysregulation, and some
may have abnormal adrenal function tests. 299 Exophthalmos, indolent corneal ulcers, and
keratopathy have also been reported in association with canine hyperadrenocorticism, 1,2,328
Palpable hepatomegaly is a common feature of canine hyperadrenocorticism, Fasting
hyperglycemia occurs in 40% to 60% of cases, with overt diabetes mellitus being noted in
approximately 15% of dogs. 177 • 265. 286 Other complications associated with hyperadrenocorticism include hypertension.F" recurrent urinary tract infections, urolithiasis, and acute
pancreatitis.v" Acute abdomen with or without hemoperitoneum is a rare manifestation of
hemorrhage from an adrenocortical neoplasm.P"

DIAGNOSIS
Before the onset of the cutaneous signs, the differential diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism
is basically that of polyuria and polydipsia: chronic renal disease, chronic liver disease,
diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus (pituitary or renal), psychogenic polydipsia, hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypernatremia, hypokalemia, hypoadrenocorticism, polycythemia

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 805

vera, and pyrexia. 1. 2. 11 With truncal alopecia and no polyuria and polydipsia, the differential diagnosis includes hypothyroidism, hyposomatotropism, and adrenal or gonadal sex
hormone imbalance. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
hemogram, urinalysis, serum chemistry studies, radiography, skin biopsy, and adrenal
function tests. If the dog has some other condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus), that condition
should be controlled before adrenal function tests are performed.F" Many chronic diseases make it difficult to interpret test results.
Hemograms classically reveal leukocytosis (17,000 to 68,000/jLI), neutrophilia (11,500
to 65,000/jLI), lymphopenia (0 to 1000/jLI), and eosinopenia (0 to lO00/jLI).1.2,l1· 235, 272, 280, 333
Erythrocytosis (polycythemia), nucleated red blood cells, thrombocytosis, and hypersegmentation of neutrophil nuclei may also occur. Urinalysis usually reveals a low specific
gravity (typically, 1.012). In addition, 50% of these dogs have urinary tract infection,
usually manifested only by bacteriuria. Proteinuria is common. The urinary protein/creatinine ratio is increased in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, but the elevation is not specific
for that disorder.F" Calcium crystals may be observed because these dogs are 10 times
more likely to have uroliths. 229 About 15% of these dogs have glucosuria in association
with concurrent diabetes mellitus, The urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio is typically elevated in hyperadrenocorticism. However, elevations are not specific for hyperadrenocorticism. 203• 237 Because the seemingly trivial stress of an office visit can falsely elevate the
cortisol/creatinine ratio, owners should collect screening urine samples at home. 32o
Serum chemistry panel abnormalities may include mild to marked elevations in levels
of cholesterol and triglycerides.P" serum alanine transaminase, serum aspartate transaminase, and glucose, and a decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level. Hypophosphatemia
occurs in about 33% of dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism. Abnormal glucose
tolerance test results and elevated serum insulin levels are common.
The serum alkaline phosphatase level is usually elevated in canine hyperadrenocorticism (80% to 95%) and is mainly due to a steroid-induced Isoenzyme.P" 311. 338 Because
serum alkaline phosphatases can be increased by anticonvulsants or in diabetes mellitus,
hepatic disease, and other nonadrenal illnesses, results of this testing cannot be considered
diagnostic.l 84 , 267, 297 If the alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes are determined and the dog
has elevations in both the liver and cortisol fractions, it has severe liver disease and may
be more at risk for adverse reactions with o,p'-DDD treatment.v"
Basal thyroid hormone levels (TT 4 , fT4 , and TT 3 ) are usually low in canine hyperadrenocorticism.l- 2. 207 These spuriously low thyroid hormone levels are caused by glucocorticoids and do not usually indicate concurrent hypothyroidism. The results of TSH stimulation tests are usually normal, but pre-TSH and post-TSH levels may be below the normal
ranges. When the hyperadrenocorticism is corrected, thyroid hormone levels return to
normal. Occasionally, a dog truly has concurrent hypothyroidism and requires thyroid
hormone maintenance therapy.
Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism often have elevated systolic (180 to 280 mm Hg;
normal, 170 or less) and diastolic (110 to 180 mm Hg; normal, 100 or less) blood
pressures, which may predispose to thromboembolism, glomerulosclerosis, left ventricular
hypertrophy, congestive heart failure, and retinal detachment.Pf- 272, 280 The blood pressure
mayor may not normalize with treatment.F" In dogs with cushingoid myopathies, electromyographic studies have revealed bizarre high-frequency discharges in association with
histopathologic findings in skeletal muscle (atrophy, degeneration, and necrosis) and peripheral nerves (segmental demyelination).
Dogs with hyperglucocorticoidism have decreased blood GH levels, which respond
poorly or not at all to xylazine or clonidine.'- 2. 11. 280, 290, 368 The pituitary dysfunction in
these dogs extends to other hormones and can influence serum gonadotropin (LH and
FSH) levels, prolactin levels, and testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone levels.'- 409
Serum testosterone responses to exogenous LH or human chorionic gonadotropin injections are normal in this situation.
Radiography may reveal (1) hepatomegaly; (2) osteoporosis and osteomalacia (especially of vertebrae, ribs, and flat bones), with or without pathologic fractures; (3) dystrophic mineralization of soft tissues (especially of the lung, the kidney, and the skin); and

806 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
(4) adrenocortical neoplasms. The success rate of demonstrating adrenal tumors with
routine radiographic techniques varies from 27% to 57%.256,277,326,327 Mineralization in the
area of an adrenal gland indicates tumor, but does not differentiate adenomas from
adenocarcinomas, because the incidence of mineralization is similar for both. Special
radiographic techniques (nephrotomography and x-ray computed tomography) are reported to be near perfect in detecting adrenal tumors. 256, 258, 288, 325-327 This testing does
not differentiate adenomas from adenocarcinomas and is impractical for routine use.
Easy access to sensitive imaging techniques (ultrasonography, x-ray computed tomography, nuclear magnetic resonance) has greatly increased the clinician's ability to demonstrate and localize adrenocortical tumors and to evaluate the pituitary region. 334 Although
brain imaging could be a routine part of the initial diagnostic work-up of an animal with
hyperadrenocorticism, risk and cost efficacy must be evaluated carefully in the patients
with no neurologic signS.314 In two studies on 34 dogs with pituitary-dependent disease
and no neurologic signs, pituitary masses were detected in 19 (56%) dogs. 174. 175 This
compared with the 100% rate when central neurologic signs are present.l'" Thirteen dogs,
8 of which showed positive results initially, were re-evaluated in 1 year.F" A mass was
detected in 2 of the 5 dogs initially considered negative, and the previously documented
mass had enlarged in only 4 of the 8 dogs. These data suggest that initial pituitary imaging
is of little prognostic value in dogs not undergoing hypophysectomy. The primary place of
pituitary imaging studies is in patients with neurologic signs, especially when those signs
only occur after medical treatment has been tnstituted.l'" If the neurologic signs are due
to drug toxicity, no mass will be detected.
Routine use of an abdominal ultrasonogram can also be questioned in dogs with
classic clinical and laboratory signs of pituitary-dependent disease, It is of great diagnostic
significance in patients when adrenocortical neoplasia, pituitary-dependent disease with an
intercurrent pheochromocytoma, or nonadrenal illness with overlapping symptoms (e.g.,
hepatic encephalopathy, steroid-producing luteomas") are suspected.P" 326 In these latter
conditions, both glands should be evaluated and compared with each other and the
normal values established for dogs.l 69, 222, 231 Because bilateral adrenal neoplasia-'? and
intercurrent adrenal neoplasia and pituitary-dependent disease l73, 220, 324 has been documented, the evaluation should not stop when a mass is detected in one gland.
Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism may have significant elevations of coagulation factors
I (fibrinogen), V, VII, IX, and X, as well as elevated levels of antithrombin III and
plasminogen. These abnormalities may predispose the patient to hypercoagulability and
thromboembolism.
Histopathology

Skin biopsy in canine hyperadrenocorticism may reveal many nondiagnostic changes consistent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, epidermal
melanosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair
follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, and sebaceous gland atrophyi.v 16 Histopathologic findings highly suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism include dystrophic mineralization
(of collagen fibers, basement membrane zone of epidermis and hair follicles), thin dermis,
and absence of arrector pili muscles (Figs. 10-5 to 10-7), Histopathologic findings
consistent with secondary pyoderma and foreign-body granuloma (associated with dystrophic mineralization) may be detected. Histopathologic characteristics of cutaneous phlebectasias range from marked dilatation and congestion of superficial dermal blood capillaries (macular stage) (Fig. 10-8) to a lobular proliferation of normal-appearing superficial
dermal blood vessels, which may be encased by an epidermal collarette (papular stage).30B
In many cases, especially with chronic disease, the tentative diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism is straightforward and easily supported by the results of routine laboratory tests.
At the other end of the spectrum is the dog with truncal alopecia, recurrent pyoderma, or
seborrhea with no nondermatologic signs. Results of routine tests in these dogs often
suggest a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism, but more than 30% of these dogs have no
convincing hematologic or biochemical evidence of that disease.P" In these dogs, the
diagnosis must be confirmed or refuted by adrenal function tests.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 807

FIGURE 10-5. Canine hyperadrenocorticism. Note follicular keratosis and atrophy, absence of hair shafts, sebaceous gland atrophy, thin dermis, and dystrophic mineralization of
dermis (right) and surface (left).

Adrenal Function Tests

Once spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism is suspected, the diagnosis is substantiated and
further defined by a two-stage protocol. The objective of the first, or screening, stage is to
confirm or rule out the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism.s-" After the diagnosis is
confirmed, the purpose of the second stage is to differentiate pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism from that caused by adrenal neoplasia.s'<

FIGURE 10-6. Canine hyperadrenocorticism. Dystrophic mineralization of the glassy membrane of
a hair follicle.

808 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-7. Dystrophic mineralization of dermal collagen.

Adrenal function tests are basically of two types: those that are single measurements
of basal glucocorticoid levels in urine or blood and those that are provocative, dynamicresponse tests of the glucocorticoid levels in blood. Aside from the urinary cortisol!
creatinine ratio test, all cortisol evaluations are currently conducted on serum or plasma.
Single measurements of plasma cortisol are completely unreliable, Normal dogs, dogs with
nonadrenal disease, dogs recently hospitalized, and stressed dogs can have cortisol levels
above normal levels, whereas up to 50% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism can have
levels within the normal range. 183. 212, 239, 280 Currently, the only single cortisol assessment
that can be of diagnostic significance is the urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio. Normal
dogs have low values (5.7 ± 0.9), whereas dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have high
values (337.6 ± 72).203, 237 However, because dogs under the stress of an examination,

FIGURE 10-8. Cutaneous phlebectasia. Marked dilatation and congestion of superficial vessels.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 809

with renal disease, and with other disorders can have values that overlap those found in
hyperadrenocorticism, the test is not specific for hyperadrenocorticism and performs best
in excluding that diagnosis,320
Single measurements of endogenous plasma ACTH levels can aid in the diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism and the definition of its cause. 343c Plasma concentrations deteriorate
when the sample is unfrozen. The addition of aprotinin, a proteinase inhibitor, to the
sample prevents concentration changes in unfrozen samples provided the sample remains
cold and arrives at the laboratory within 4 days.247 Plasma ACTH levels should be normal
to elevated (> 40 pg/ml) in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and low
to undetectable « 20 pg/ml) with adrenal neoplasia. 225, 280, 282 Unfortunately, not all dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism have abnormal levels, and one study of 41 dogs with adrenal
tumors showed that 30% of dogs had levels within the normal range. 333 Repetition
sampling probably would increase the sensitivity of this testing but is cost prohibitive.
Plasma ACTH levels should only be evaluated in conjunction with other tests .
• Tests to Diagnose Hyperadrenocorticism. The ACTH stimulation test reliably
documents a diagnosis of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism or hypoadrenocorticism in dogs.
Basal blood cortisol levels are low or normal and show little or no response to ACTH.
Two commonly used ACTH stimulation test protocols for dogs are as follows: (1) plasma
or serum cortisol determinations are collected before and 2 hours after the 1M injection
of 2.2 IU/kg of ACTH gel and (2) plasma or serum cortisol determinations are collected
before and 1 hour after the IV injection of either 0.25 mg/dog or 5 I-tg/kg of synthetic
ACTH.
In hyperadrenocorticism, dogs with pituitary-dependent bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
should show an exaggerated response to the administration of ACTH.280, 343b Because
adrenal tumors should secrete independently of ACTH, poststimulation values should
show little change from the initial sample. Unfortunately, these theories do not absolutely
hold in the clinical situation.
The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is used to diagnose spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism in dogs." Plasma or serum cortisol levels are determined before and 8
hours after an IV injection of 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasone. Most investigators also draw
a sample at 4 hours. In normal dogs, the low dose of dexamethasone consistently suppresses cortisol levels to less than 50% of baseline or less than 1 I-tg/dl for the test period.
Because of differences in dexamethasone metabolism in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
and possibly other nonadrenal illnesses, the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test does
not identify all dogs with hyperadrenocorttcism.v" 242 This testing can give false-positive
results in uncontrolled diabetics and other chronically stressed dogs and is uninterpretable
in the dog with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism.
One study on 216 dogs with hyperadrenocorticism used the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test to document hyperadrenocorticism and to discriminate between pituitarydependent disease and adrenocortical neoplasia.P" Thirty-five dogs had adrenal tumors,
and 181 had pituitary-dependent disease. By definition, hyperadrenocorticism was documented if the cortisol level at 8 hours was greater than 1.4 I-tg/dl. Under these criteria,
diagnosis was correct in 213 of the 216 (99%). To discriminate between pituitary-dependent disease and adrenal neoplasia, pituitary-dependent disease was diagnosed if the 4- or
8-hour sample was less than 50% of baseline or less than 1.4 I-tg/dl at 4 hours. None of
the dogs with adrenal tumors satisfied the criteria for pituitary-dependent disease, but in
many dogs with pituitary-dependent disease, adrenal tumor could have erroneously been
diagnosed depending on which definition was being followed. This and many other studies
show that the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is not specific for hyperadrenocorticism, especially when dogs with chronic nonadrenal disorders are in the study population.206, 239, 318
In most cases, the low-dose test does not reliably discriminate between pituitarydependent disease and adrenal neoplasia. One pattern, complete suppression at 4 hours
"See references 1, 2, 235, 255, 256, 280, 333, 3431.

810 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

with loss of suppression at 8 hours, has a high predictive value for pituitary-dependent
disease.P? Unless the dog shows this pattern, a high-dose dexamethasone suppression test,
measurement of plasma ACTH levels, or some other testing must be performed to
separate pituitary-dependent disease from adrenal neoplasia.
• Tests to Differentiate the Cause of Hyperadrenocorticism. Because the treatment of choice is different for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal
neoplasia, every effort should be made to define the cause of the hyperadrenocorticism.
Unless the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test shows the diagnostic pituitary-dependent pattern or the imaging techniques (radiographs, ultrasonography, and so on) clearly
demonstrate adrenal neoplasia or bilateral hyperplasia, further suppression testing is necessary.
Although various stimulation or suppression tests have been studied over the
years,l1· 197. 200. 201. 256 the only test currently used is the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test. 343c High-dose dexamethasone suppression testing is performed with the IV injection of 0.1 mg/kg of dexamethasone with sampling points at 0, 4, and 8 hours. 235, 272, 333
Some investigators recommend a dose of 1 mg/kg,280 but there is no clear and convincing
evidence that this dose increases the accuracy of the test in most dogs. Some investigators
define suppression as a decrease in cortisol to less than 50% of the level at time zero,
whereas other researchers use levels of less than 1.5 JLg/dl. In theory, dogs with pituitarydependent disease should demonstrate suppression completely at 4 hours and maintain or
escape suppression at 8 hours. With adrenal neoplasia, partial or no suppression
should occur. However, suppression is inadequate in 15% to 30% of dogs with pituitarydependent disease. 179, 181, 240, 280, 285 In these cases, measurement of endogenous plasma
ACTH levels can be helpful. However, one study showed that ACTH levels and high-dose
dexamethasone testing gave contradictory results in 15% of dogs tested, so some dogs
cannot be categorized by this testing. 333
CRF stimulation testing can be useful in differentiating naturally occurring hypoadrenocorticism from the iatrogenic form 185, 241, 285 and pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism from adrenal neoplasia. Intravenous injection of 1 JLg/kg of CRF to normal dogs
causes rapid elevations in both plasma ACTH and cortisol levels. Dogs with pituitarydependent disease show prompt elevation in both ACTH and cortisol levels, whereas dogs
with adrenal tumors should not respond. Clinically useful protocols will be developed
when CRF becomes available for routine diagnostic use.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis for untreated naturally occurring canine hyperadrenocorticism is poor, with
death often occurring within 2 years (from such conditions as septicemia, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, and thromboembolisml.P'" 273 There is no
clear and convincing evidence that treatment of the uncomplicated case prolongs survival
time. However, successful treatment improves the quality of life for the dog and its
owner. Death may be associated with adrenalectomy, hypophysectomy, o,p/-DDD administration, or concurrent diseases, In addition, death may occur at any time during or after
therapy related to growth of a pituitary neoplasm or metastasis of an adrenocortical
adenocarcinoma. Because hyperadrenocorticism is a disease of older dogs, many dogs die
or are euthanized within 2 years of diagnosis as a result of any of the aforementioned
conditions. Several independent studies on large numbers of dogs gave mean survival
times of approximately 2 years, with ranges from 10 days to 8.2 years. 249, 280
The cause of hyperadrenocorticism determines the treatment. Adrenocortical tumors
should be surgically removed.P"- 301 When the tumor is undiagnosed, has metastasized, or
cannot be removed because of the patient's health, medical treatment can be instituted,
but the vigor of therapy and results are different from those obtained in treating pituitarydependent disease. 202, 250 Before any specific treatment is undertaken, all intercurrent
disorders (e.g., urinary tract infection and diabetes mellitus) should be identified and
treatment of these conditions should be instituted.v 274 Although the problems identified

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 81 1

may not respond completely to treatment until the hyperadrenocorticism is resolved, they
can become life threatening to the patient if their control is not attempted.
Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism

Surgical treatment can be accomplished with either bilateral adrenalectomy or hypophysectorny.'- 2. 198. 261-263 Both procedures necessitate a skilled surgeon, intensive intraoperative and postoperative monitoring and supportive care, lifelong hormone replacement
therapy, and considerable expense. Because some residual cells can be left, clinical signs
can persist or recur at a later date.
Radiation therapy offers a nonmedical alternative for dogs with pituitary-dependent
disease.P" 193. 216. 258. 314 Because of the specialized equipment needed, treatment centers
are limited and the process is very expensive. Although irradiation can be used in any dog,
it finds greatest use in dogs with neurologic signs secondary to macroadenomas. Protocols
vary with the study, but doses between 44 and 48 Gy, fractionated in 11 or 12 doses, are
typical. Side effects are minimal but, because response time is slow, some dogs deteriorate
before the treatments can be completed. Small tumors appear to respond better than
large ones. 314 Although improvement can occur in most treated dogs, the improvement
may not be sufficient to return the dog to a normal life, and relapses occur in up to 50%
of the cases.P"
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism has been treated with drugs that act on the
central nervous system, adenohypophysis, and adrenal gland. 1. 2. 11. 280 Cyproheptadine
hydrochloride (Periactin) is an antiserotonin agent that blocks serotonin-mediated CRF
and ACTH release. The drug has been used to treat spontaneous canine hyperadrenocorticism (0.3 to 3 mg/kg/day orally), but most dogs were not helped. 312 Bromocriptine
mesylate (Parlodel) is a potent dopamine receptor agonist that inhibits ACTH secretion.
This drug has also been used to treat dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (up to
0.1 mg/kg/day) with rare benefit. 1. 2. 11 Side effects with these drugs include vomiting,
depression, behavioral changes, and changes in appetite. Because of their frequent side
effects and infrequent benefit, these drugs appear to have limited usefulness in the
management of hyperadrenocorticism.'
Trilostane, an inhibitor of 38-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, is used in Europe for the
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in humans. In a preliminary study of five dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism, all responded, even the one dog with a nonresectable adrenal
tumor, to treatment with no side effects noted.F" The dosage used varied from 2.6 to
4.8 mg/kg. In three dogs, the dosage was given twice daily until a response occurred, then
the administration was reduced to once daily. The other two dogs received the drug once
daily from the onset. With its apparent high degree of safety and efficacy, further studies
are indicated.
The drug L-deprenyl (Anipryl, Pfizer Animal Health) is a selective irreversible monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitor. Because MAO-B is used in dopamine metabolism, its
inhibition increases central dopamine concentration. L-deprenyl is used in the treatment
of cognitive dysfunction in geriatric dogs and in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.180-182
Most old dogs with cognitive dysfunction have an inter-related to intercurrent HPA
dysregulation.v" Its use is contraindicated in patients taking other MAO inhibitors, which
include amitraz and tricyclic antidepressants. These drugs should be withdrawn for at least
14 days before treatment is begun.""
As discussed previously, the release of ACTH from the pars intermedia is tonically
inhibited by various neurotransmitters, especially dopamine. 178. 182 Dopamine inhibits
ACTH secretion. It is estimated that 30% of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism have pars intermedia involvement with primary dopamine depletion, secondary
excessive ACTH secretion, and tertiary bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. L-deprenyl restores
the dopamine concentration, thus reducing ACTH secretion. If the hyperadrenocorticism
is secondary to CRH-mediated ACTH secretion, L-deprenyl will have little or no effect.
Because there is no readily available test to determine if the patient in question has
pars intermedia involvement, the only way to determine efficacy is by therapeutic trial.

812 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

Because approximately 70% of dogs with pituitary-dependent disease do not respond to
this drug, and those that do do so slowly, it is suggested that L-deprenyl be used as a
first-line agent in dogs with mild-to-moderate disease. With severe disease, other treatments should be used to put the disease into remission with consideration of L-deprenyl
for long-term maintenance.V" The drug is given daily at 1 mg/kg for an initial 30 to 60
days. If no response occurs, the dosage should be increased to 2 mg/kg for an additional
trial period. In a report on 90 dogs, 38 needed the higher dosage."? Response is gradual
and cumulative. Because the drug is very safe and not adrenolytic, response is determined
by change in clinical signs and laboratory monitoring is not needed. Adverse reactions
occur in approximately 5% of patients and include diarrhea, vomiting, listlessness, disorientation, decreased hearing, and restlessness.l'" In the 90 dog study, the owners and
veterinarians of about 80% of those dogs thought the dog was better with treatment. In a
different study of 10 dogs, only 2 lmproved.P"
Ketoconazole is an antifungal imidazole drug that also inhibits adrenocortical steroidogenesis in dogs and humans.v 335 Normal dogs treated with 10 to 30 mg/kg/day of
ketoconazole show significant decreases in basal cortisol levels and response to exogenous
ACTH.335 Similar response occurs when dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism or adrenal neoplasia are treated. 204. 205 When 9 dogs with adrenocortical neoplasia
and 11 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism were treated with 15 mg/kg
every 12 hours for 15 days to 12 months, 18 dogs returned to clinical normalcy.v" Two
dogs with pituitary-dependent disease did not respond. In another study of 11 dogs, the 9
with pituitary-dependent disease all responded but experienced relapse within 1 year. 2B7
Two dogs with adrenal tumors did not respond. The protocol for the use of ketoconazole
recommends that the drug be given at 5 mg/kg every 12 hours for 7 days to determine
whether the dog shows any idiosyncratic reactions to its administration. If none occurs,
the dose is increased to 10 mglkg every 12 hours for 14 days. Response is determined by
ACTH stimulation testing. Urinary cortisol/creatinine ratios cannot be used for monitoring. 16B. 223 Because ketoconazole is an enzyme inhibitor and not an adrenolytic agent, it is
imperative that the drug be given 1 to 3 hours before testing. If this testing shows
poststimulation cortisol levels above the reference range, the dosage should be increased
to 15 mg/kg every 12 hours for 14 days. If this dosage produces the desired suppression,
it must be maintained on a daily basis. Although ketoconazole is safe and effective in the
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism, its expense precludes its long-term use in many dogs.
Its primary indications are cases of adrenal neoplasia in which surgery cannot be performed or in which metastasis has occurred and dogs who cannot tolerate other medical
treatments.
The drug of choice for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs is
o,p'-DDD (mitotane, Lysodren).194. 249. 273, 280 This drug is a chlorinated hydrocarbon
derivative that causes selective necrosis and atrophy of the zona fasciculata and zona
reticularis of the adrenal cortex, whereas the zona glomerulosa (mineralocorticoidproducing zone) is relatively resistant. In a small number of dogs, this zone is destroyed
with treatment and the dog is a permanent Addisonian.P' The initial dosage of o,p'-DDD
is 25 to 50 mg/kg/day for 7 to 10 days. The daily dose should be divided in half and
administered every 12 hours with food. 329 Small doses of glucocorticoid (oral prednisone
or prednisolone at 0.2 mg/kg/day, or oral hydrocortisone at 1 mg/kg/day) are often given
during the initial 7 to 10 days of o,p'-DDD therapy to minimize the side effects associated with acute glucocorticoid withdrawal. Some authors advise against glucocorticoid use
because it makes evaluation of early responses difficult and is necessary in only about 5%
of cases.s In dogs with concurrent diabetes mellitus, treatment with o,p'-DDD reduces
the daily insulin requirement and can predispose to insulin overdosage and hypoglycemia.l?" A low initial dosage of o,p'-DDD (25 rug/kg/day) and a higher daily maintenance
dose of prednisone or prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg) or hydrocortisone (2 mg/kg) prevent the
rapid reduction in circulating glucocorticoid levels and daily insulin requirements and
allow for easier regulation of the diabetes.
The most common side effects observed during initial o,p'-DDD therapy include
lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, anorexia, and weakness.v" Less common side effects include

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 813

disorientation, ataxia, and head pressing. About 25% of dogs have one or more side effects
during initial therapy, but the effects are relatively mild in most dogs. Side effects develop
when plasma cortisol levels either fall below normal basal range (less than 1 JLg/dl) or
drop too rapidly into normal range (glucocorticoid withdrawal syndrome) and resolve
promptly with glucocorticoid supplementation. If adverse signs occur during initial
o,p'-DDD therapy, the drug administration should be stopped and the glucocorticoid dose
doubled until the dog can be evaluated. If clinical signs persist longer than 3 days after
increasing the glucocorticoid dose, other medical problems should be considered.
There are many ways to assess the effectiveness of initial o,p'-DDD therapy. Measurement of daily water consumption and eosinophil counts can be used but may be
misleading because they only indirectly reflect circulating cortisol levels and not all
cushingoid dogs manifest eosinopenia or polydipsia, especially while hospitalized. Urinary
cortisol/creatinine ratios cannot be used for monitoring. 289 Most investigators perform an
ACTH stimulation test to monitor the level of adrenal suppression. Because prednisone,
prednisolone, and hydrocortisone all cross-react in most cortisol assays, glucocorticoid
supplementation should not be given on the morning of ACTH stimulation testing. To
ensure adequate control of hyperadrenocorticism with o,p'-DDD, both basal and postACTH cortisol levels should remain within the normal resting (basal) range. 172 After
o.p' -DDD induction therapy and ACTH stimulation testing, o,p' -DDD administration
should be discontinued and glucocorticoid supplementation should be continued until
cortisol results are available.
About 15% of dogs still have exaggerated cortisol production after initial o,p'-DDD
therapy.249 In these dogs, daily o,p'-DDD therapy should be continued and ACTH stimulation tests repeated at 5- to lO-day intervals until basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels are
in the normal range. This may necessitate as long as 30 to 50 days in some dogs. 249 In
contrast, approximately 40% of dogs have basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels below
normal range after initial o,p'-DDD therapy. In these dogs, o,p'-DDD administration
should be stopped and glucocorticoid supplementation continued as needed until basal
cortisol levels normalize. This usually takes about 2 to 6 weeks.
After normal cortisol levels are documented, o,p'-DDD is continued at a weekly
maintenance dosage. The weekly maintenance dosage is that used for loading and should
be divided in half and given twice weekly. During maintenance therapy with o,p'-DDD,
glucocorticoid supplementation is rarely required, In the rare dog that manifests poor
appetite, depression, weakness, and mild weight loss in spite of normal cortisol levels,
alternate-morning doses of prednisone or prednisolone (0.4 mg/kg) are beneficial.
About 5% of the dogs treated with maintenance o,p'-DDD therapy experience iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism characterized by low basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels and
hyperkalemia or hyponatremia. These changes can occur after weeks or years of treatment
but typically occur at about 5 months.P? Adverse clinical signs resolve after stopping 0, p'DDD therapy and supplementation with appropriate doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. Iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism may be temporary or permanent, and further
o,p'-DDD therapy is not indicated unless the hypoadrenocorticism resolves and basal and
post-ACTH cortisol levels increase above normal range.
About 60% of dogs treated with initial loading and maintenance doses of o,p'-DDD
experience relapse within 12 months of treatment as evidenced by recurrence of clinical
signs and elevated basal and post-ACTH cortisol levels.P'" 293 Control is regained by daily
treatment for 5 to 14 days, and then maintenance is reinstituted with larger dosages,
typically 25% to 50% higher than that used previously. Approximately 40% of the dogs
who experience relapse once do so one or more additional times. 249 Dosage adjustments
allow control to be regained. In a study on 200 dogs treated with o,p'-DDD, 184 were
well controlled with maintenance doses ranging from 26.8 to 330 mg/kg/week. 249 To
ensure continued control and prevent serious relapse during o,p'-DDD therapy, ACTH
stimulation testing should be repeated every 6 months during maintenance therapy. With
careful monitoring, survival times exceeding 3 years can be expectsd.P'
An alternative protocol for the use of o,p'-DDD has been developed to minimize the
occurrence of relapses and the unexpected development of hypoadrenocorticism. High

8 14 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

doses are given for extended periods to destroy the adrenal cortex intentionally, resolving
the hyperadrenocorticism but causing permanent hypoadrenocorticism.v" 293, 294 The o,p'DOD is administered at 50 to 75 mg/kg/day for medium-sized to large dogs for 25 days.
Dosages up to 100 mg/kg/day are recommended for toy breeds. The daily dosage is
divided into three or four equal parts and is given with food. Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement therapy is started on day 3 of treatment. Cortisone acetate is
administered at 1 mg/kg every 12 hours until 1 week after the D,p' -DOD regimen is
completed, and the dosage is then reduced to 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours. Fludrocortisone
(0.0125 mg/kg) and sodium chloride (0.1 mg/kg/day divided over two or three meals) is
suggested therapy for the hypoadrenocorticism. Adjustments in treatment are made according to the animal's needs. Although this protocol is designed to destroy the adrenal
cortex, the treatment is not uniformly successful because relapse rates near 30% within 1
year have been reported. 188, 293 Retreatment with the original dosage for 25 days and then
once-weekly administration for 5 to 6 weeks should result in another remission. Because
some dogs treated by the standard o,p' -DOD protocol need nearly 70 days of loading,
some of the relapses with this new protocol may be due to an insufficient course of
treatment. An ACTH stimulation test should be performed after the 25 days of treatment
to ensure that adrenal suppression has occurred. Additional loading time is indicated if the
adrenals hyperrespond to ACTH.
Aside from pituitary irradiation, none of the treatments described affects pituitary
tumors, and their continued growth can be expected. Growth is slow but progressive.
Large tumors can result in neurologic dysfunction with stupor, anorexia, and head pressing most commonly observed.F" Other signs include pacing, circling, behavioral changes,
weakness, seizures, ataxia, and adipsia. If these signs develop, pituitary irradiation is
necessary for continued management.
Adrenocortical Neoplasia

The therapy of choice for adrenocortical neoplasia is adrenalectomy.P'l:'?' The majority of
dogs with clinical evidence of hyperadrenocorticism and nonsuppressible adrenal function
tests have a unilateral adrenocortical tumor, Because bilateral adrenocortical tumors have
been documented.F" both adrenal glands should be evaluated carefully by ultrasound or
other imaging studies before surgery is undertaken. During the evaluation, both adrenal
glands should be compared in size and consistency with each other and with normal
values for dogs. Despite the common conception that the gland contralateral to the tumor
will be atrophied, that gland often is normal in size. 230 Dogs with symmetric and normalsized glands should be evaluated for a steroid-producing tumor of another organ system
(e.g., luteoma, a serious hepatic disorder with shunting, or an ectopic ACTH-producing
tumor). A more problematic situation is when there is an obvious mass in one gland while
the contralateral gland is normal sized or somewhat enlarged. Is this a dog with pituitarydependent disease and an intercurrent pheochromocytoma'Fv'w or a dog with a unilateral
adrenocortical tumor? Because dogs with pheochromocytomas are at increased risk during
anesthesia, the clinical and laboratory data should be reviewed carefully. If any inconsistencies are found, additional testing for pheochromocytoma should be conducted before
the dog is taken to surgery.
In one report, tumor cells were found in blood vessels in 22 of 37 adrenal tumors and
8 of the 26 dogs that survived the surgery experienced relapses in clinical signs.319
Accordingly, all surgical candidates should be evaluated thoroughly before and during
surgery for evidence of metastatic disease. During surgery, the viscera, especially the
pancreas, should be handled carefully because these dogs are prone to potentially fatal
pancreatitis. If the contralateral adrenal gland is atrophied, the dog will have to be
supported as a glucocortiCOid-deficient patient with maintenance and stress doses of
glucocorticoids for 2 or more months. ACTH stimulation testing can be performed every
2 to 4 weeks to determine when the remaining adrenal gland has returned to normal
function.
If the adrenal neoplasm is malignant, if the owner refuses surgery for the dog, or if
the dog is considered an unsuitable surgical candidate, medical treatment may be benefi-

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 81S

cial. Although published data are limited, ketoconazole appears to be effective for both
adenomas and adenocarcinomas.F"- 287 Because ketoconazole is an enzyme blocker and not
an adrenolytic agent, tumor growth continues and metastasis, with all its sequelae, may
occur. Because o,p'-DDD is an adrenolytic agent, it can be beneficial in some dogs with
adrenal tumors. Reports of success with both the standard and new protocol have been
reported.202.293 With the standard protocol, loading often takes longer and can necessitate
dosages as high as 150 mg/kg/day. Relapses are common and, in general, maintenance
dosages are much higher than those needed in pituitary-dependent disease. In a study of
32 dogs, 66% were considered to have a good to excellent response to o,p'-DDD, with
a mean survival time of 16.4 months, and a final mean maintenance dosage of 35.3 to
1273 mg/kg/week.F"
When severe calcinosis cutis is present, treatment with DMSO gel hastens resolution
of the lesions.F" A thin film of the gel is applied to the lesions once or twice daily until
resolved.
Iatrogenic Hyperadrenocorticism
Therapy for canine iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism necessitates ceasing excessive exogenous glucocorticoid administration. When glucocorticoid therapy is withdrawn, patients
may be susceptible to hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal insufficiency for 3 to 12 months and
the dog may show signs of glucocorticoid insufficiency under normal living conditions or
with stress. Some investigators anticipate these problems and institute replacement therapy with hydrocortisone (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg/day) or prednisolone (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/day).
The glucocorticoid administration is slowly withdrawn during 7 to 14 days. Other investigators, including ourselves, do not routinely use the steroid supplements unless surgery or
some other known stressful situation is to occur. The glucocorticoid is dispensed and the
owners are instructed to use the drug if the dog needs it, but most dogs do not. 232
Recovery usually occurs within 3 to 4 months. Exogenous ACTH should not be used in
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. The block after prolonged glucocorticoid therapy is not
at the level of the adrenocortical response to ACTH but at the level of the ability of the
hypothalamic-pituitary unit to resume release of CRF and ACTH. Therefore, ACTH
supplementation may actually aggravate the problem.!' 2, 11
After the hyperadrenocorticism is controlled, the skin may initially show increasing
scaling and pigmentation and new hair regrowth may be different from the normal color
(for example, gray hair grows in black, black grows in red) and texture. With successful
therapy, the cutaneous signs of hyperadrenocorticism, including calcinosis cutis, usually
regress within 3 to 4 months. In the rare case that has progressed to cutaneous ossification, the skin lesions persist unless removed surgically. Some dogs with bacterial pyoderma
have recurring episodes of infection for up to 1 year after the hyperadrenocorticism has
been controlled. Noncutaneous signs should resolve slowly, but some signs may remain
owing to the physiologic alterations.l?" 273

Feline Hyperadrenocorticism
Both naturally occurring and iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism are rare in the cat.

CAUSES AND PATHOGENESIS
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism is a rare disease in the cat, with fewer than 100
cases reported.F"- 192, 226, 238, 251. 254a, 269, 270, 281, 331 With such a limited data base, it is difficult
to make precise statements on the value of the various diagnostic tests and the best
method of treatment. Approximately 80% of cats have pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism resulting from a pituitary adenoma or adenocarcinoma, whereas the remainder
have functioning adrenocortical tumors. 192, 343a Both adrenocortical adenomas and adenocarcinomas have been reported, and in one case, progesterone secretion appeared to be
responsible for the clinical signS.178 One cat had a functioning adrenocortical adenoma in
its remaining adrenal gland approximately 1 year after the other gland was removed for a

816 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

similar tumor. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism can be produced with only great difficulty
in the cat,22L .302. .307 possibly because of the lower number of low-capacity, high-affinity
dexamethasone-binding receptors in this species..317

CLINICAL FEATURES
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism typically occurs in middle-aged to old cats. 182a
No breed predisposition has been noted. Females appear to be at higher risk.l 92, 226 The
clinical syndrome is not as predictable as it is in the dog. The most common owner
complaint is marked polyuria and polydipsia. Weight loss, anorexia, polyphagia, and depression also may be reported. On physical examination, muscle wasting and a potbelly are
common findings. Skin changes occur in about half the cases and include alopecia (see
Fig. 1O-2F and G), thin skin (see Fig. 1O-2F), fragile skin (Fig. 1O-9A; see Fig. 1O-2H),
easy bruising (see Fig. 1O-9B), recurrent abscessation, comedones, seborrhea, and hyperpigmentation. 226. 269. 270 The hair loss can be partial or complete and involve the entire
trunk, the flank region, or the ventrum.P" The increased fragility of the skin occurs in
over 50% of the cases and is manifested by tearing during grooming or routine handling.
Although data are limited, this extreme fragility may be more common in cats with
adrenal tumors than in those with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.P"
Reports on cats with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism are rare. 221, .302, .307 These cases
can have all of the clinical signs of the naturally-occurring disease (e.g" muscle wasting,
polyuria and polydipsia, steroid-induced diabetes mellitus). Cutaneous signs seen include
hair loss, thin hypotonic skin, medial curling of the ear tips, easy bruising, mild seborrhea
sicca, and spontaneous tearing of the skin. Because medial curling of the pinna has not
been reported in the naturally occurring cases, this may be of diagnostic significance.

DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of cutaneous signs, the primary differential diagnostic consideration is
diabetes mellitus. Because approximately 90% of cats with naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism are prediabetic or overtly diabetic because of the insulin antagonistic action of
corticosteroids, the responsiveness of the cat to insulin is of key importance.s'" The
diabetes mellitus in cats with hyperadrenocorticism is difficult to impossible to regulate
without treatment of the hyperadrenocorticism. With successful treatment of the hyperadrenocorticism, the diabetes responds to insulin as expected or may spontaneously resolve.
With just hair loss, the differential diagnosis includes all causes of traumatic alopecia,
telogen defluxion, diabetes mellitus, and advanced hyperthyroidism. Cutaneous asthenia,
pancreatic neoplasia, hepatic lipidosis, progestogen administration.F" and acquired skin
fragility syndrome (see Chap. 18) must be considered when extreme fragility is noted.
In the cat, hemograms, serum chemistry panels, and urinalysis are of little diagnostic
specificity.226. 269, 270, .342 The liver enzyme elevations due to a steroid hepatopathy are
inconsistent in the cat and can be masked by biochemical alterations caused by the
frequently encountered diabetes mellitus. 184. 2,39. .302
Histopathology

Skin biopsy results can vary. In some cases, the hair follicles are in anagen with no
atrophic changes of the epidermis or pilosebaceous units. Other cats show profound
atrophic changes. The most consistent abnormality is a decreased quantity of dermal
collagen. The bundles in the superficial and deep dermis are thinner than normal, widely
separated, and without normal organlzation.'- 16.226 On electron microscopy, collagen fibril
diameters vary in size.
Adrenal Function Tests

All the various diagnostic tests used in the dog have all been used in cats, but the limited
data available make determining the reliability of each test difficult. 182a, 198, .34.3b, .34.3c

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 817

FIGURE 10-9. A, Close-up of the cat in Figure 1O-2H showing the thin, fragile skin. (Courtesy of R. Rosychuk)
B, Bruising and ulceration (tom skin) on the back of a cat with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism. The area has been
clipped. (From Scott, DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)
C, Hair loss, hyperpigmentation, and absence of primary hairs in a dwarf. D, Profound hair loss and hyperpigmentation in an adult dwarf. E, Early hyposomatotropism. Note the loss of primary hairs and early hyperpigmentation.
F, Chronic hyposomatotropism with profound hair loss and hyperpigmentation. G, Hyperestrogenism. Flank hypotrichosis. H, Same patient as in G with perineal hair loss and vulvar enlargement.

818 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

Cats excrete small amounts of cortisol in their urine.v" With hyperadrenocorticism,
the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio is elevated above normal. However, the cortisol/creatinine ratio can also be elevated in nonadrenal disease (e.g., renal failure 227), so this testing
probably has the same place in the diagnosis of feline hyperadrenocorticism as it does in
the dog. Hyperadrenocorticism can be dismissed when the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio
is normal, but elevations do not confirm that diagnosis. In the ACTH stimulation test,
both the gel (2.2 IUlkg 1M) and synthetic (125 J-tg IV) forms of ACTH have been used.
Most protocols suggest that cortisol levels be determined before and 90 minutes after
ACTH administration.F'" 283. 284, 310, 343b Most cats with hyperadrenocorticism show an
exaggerated response to ACTH, but a borderline or normal response can occur. 184, 238, 269
The cat with the progesterone-secreting adrenal tumor did not respond to ACTH.178
Three doses of dexamethasone have been used for suppression testing.182a, 189,251.269,296,310
Cortisol samples are collected before, 3 to 6 hours, and 8 hours after IV administration.
Suggested dosages vary from 0.01 to 0.1 mg/kg. Because upward of 20% of normal cats
do not show adrenal suppression when 0.01 mglkg of dexamethasone is given,178, 296 some
authors suggest 0.1 mg/kg for low-dose testing. Normal cats should have their cortisol
levels suppressed to less than 1 J-tg/dl during the test period. Where studied, all cats with
hyperadrenocorticism have failed to have their cortisol levels suppressed to normal levels.
High-dose testing is conducted with either 0.1 or 1 mg/kg. Suppression to 50% or less of
the baseline value suggests pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, but failure to suppress is not absolutely indicative of adrenal neoplasia.P" Because so few cases have been
studied, the accuracy of this cut-off point is open to question. Endogenous plasma ACTH
levels were elevated in the 23 cats tested with pituitary-dependent disease and low in 3
with adrenal neoplasia. 184, 187, 281,310 Normal or low values can occur in cats with adrenal
tumors.F"
Ultrasonographic examination of the adrenal glands in the cat can be difficult. 182a
Unilateral or bilateral adrenal enlargement, the latter being indicative of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, may occur. Special radiographic techniques may be of additional diagnostic value, but this is unproved in cats. 258

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Cats with hyperadrenocorticism often are presented late in the course of disease. At this
point, the prognosis becomes much poorer because most cats have insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, hyperfragility of the skin, or other degenerative changes. No medical treatment has been described that has had a high degree of success in the long-term management of cats with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. When o,p'-DDD was
administered orally (25 to 50 rug/kg/day) to four normal cats, two showed progressive
adrenal suppression and two cats showed no response.P" One cat experienced vomiting,
diarrhea, and anorexia. The response in diseased cats is generally poor,269 although anecdotal reports indicate success in some cases. 182a Details of successful long-term management are available only for one cat. 305 After about 2 months of daily treatment with 37.5
mg/kg/day, the cat was maintained on a weekly dose of 50 mg/kg/week. With this
treatment, all clinical signs resolved, but recurred when the drug was discontinued.
Ketoconazole is also of uncertain value. 182a Even though normal cats show no cortisol
suppression with a month's worth of treatment.P" some diseased cats improve with
treatment. When seven cats were given 20 to 30 mg/kg/day, four cats responded, two
showed no response, and one experienced thrombocytopenia.P'< 270, 315 Metyrapone, a
blocker of adrenal conversion of ll-deoxycortisol to cortisol, has been used in five cats,
with clinical response in three. 187, 257, 270 At dosages of 65 mg/kg every 12 hours, adrenal
suppression can be documented in 5 days. Treatment for longer than 30 days has not
been reported. Although L-deprenyl is reported to be safe in cats,"! no reports on its use
are available. Because intermediate lobe hormones in the cat are under dopaminergic
control,245, 337 L-deprenyl may be of some use.
Because of the limited success of medical treatments, most investigators recommend
adrenalectomy as the treatment of choice. In cats with adrenal neoplasia, surgery should

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 819

be curative with no need for maintenance therapy. In cats with pituitary-dependent
disease, bilateral adrenalectomy must be performed and lifelong treatments for hypoadrenocorticism must be administered. Because the majority of cats with hyperadrenocorticism present poor surgical risks because of their diabetes mellitus and fragile skin, medical
treatment with either ketoconazole or metyrapone should be considered. If either agent is
effective, its administration should be continued until the skin is healed and the diabetes
mellitus is controlled. After the eat's health is better, surgery should be performed. In the
largest study reported, postoperative complications developed in all 10 cats.'?' Electrolytic
irregularities were most common, but skin lacerations, pancreatitis, hypoglycemia, pneumonia, and venous thrombosis were also reported. If the cat survives the postoperative
period, all clinical signs resolve in 2 to 4 months. In most cats, the diabetes mellitus
becomes subclinical and no longer requires insulin.
There are no reports of cats with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism with signs of
glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid insufficiency on sudden cessation of treatment. Unless
the cat is to undergo surgery near the time of glucocorticoid withdrawal, replacement
therapy should not be needed.

Hypopituitarism
Hypopituitarism can be caused by failure or loss of one or more of the pituitary hormones.'- 2. 352 The endocrine manifestations of hypopituitarism are related to the type and
degree of hormonal deficiency and the stage in life at which the deficiency occurs.
Hypopituitarism may be caused by pituitary or hypothalamic deficiencies. Pituitary
deficiencies may be caused by congenital hypoplasia, destructive lesions (infections, lymphocytic hypophysitis, infiltrative diseases, trauma, and neoplasms), vascular lesions, and
the inherited disorder of German shepherds and Carnelian bear dogs. Hypothalamic
deficiencies may be caused by trauma, encephalitis, aberrant parasite migration, hamartoma, neoplasia, and neurosecretory dysfunction.
Diagnosis of hypopituitarism is based on various clinical signs, responses of various
target organs and pituitary hormones to challenges with pituitary and hypothalamic hormones and releasing factors, and various sophisticated radiographic techniques.': 2

Pituitary Dwarfism
Canine pituitary dwarfism is a hereditary hypopituitarism associated with proportionate
dwarfism, bilaterally symmetric alopecia and hyperpigmentation, and variable thyroidal,
adrenocortical, and gonadal abnormalities.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
In the German shepherd and Carnelian bear dog, pituitary dwarfism is thought to be
inherited as a simple autosomal recessive condition. I. 2. 11, 14, 355 Most affected dogs appear
to have a variably sized cyst (Rathke's cleft cyst) in the pituitary gland, resulting in varying
degrees of anterior pituitary insufficiency. Because normal dogs can have Rathke's cysts
and some dwarfs have either a hypoplastic or normal pituitary gland, the defect in some
dwarfs may be due to dysfunctional cells.l- 356, 360, 363 The clinical signs are related to GH
deficiency, with or without concurrent thyroidal, adrenocortical, and gonadal abnormalities.
Immunodeficient dwarfism has been reported in an inbred colony of Weimaraners
with GH deficiency and congenital absence of the thymic cortex.370.371
CLINICAL FEATURES
Canine pituitary dwarfism has been reported in many breeds, but predominantly in the
German shepherd and Carnelian bear dog.': 2,11,349 No sex predilection is evident.
For the first 2 to 3 months of life, the dog may appear normal and indistinguishable
from normal litter mates. After this time, the dog fails to grow, the haircoat is notably

820 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

shorter, and no primary hairs develop (Fig. 10-10). The puppy coat of secondary hairs is
retained. This hair is soft, woolly, and easily epilated (see Fig. IO-ge). Primary hairs are
often present on only the face and the distal extremities. Bilaterally symmetric alopecia
then develops, especially in the wear areas of the neck and caudolateral aspects of the
thighs. The alopecic skin is at first normally pigmented, then progresses through increasing degrees of hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 1O-9D). The skin becomes thin, hypotonic,
and scaly. Comedones may be numerous. These dogs may have behavioral abnormalities
such as fear biting and aggressiveness. Gonadal status may vary from atrophic testicles or
absence of estrus to normal findings. If there are concurrent deficiencies of TSH or
ACTH, the dogs may manifest signs of hypothyroidism and adrenocortical insufficiency. As
dwarfs grow older, they often become progressively more listless, dull, and inactive, and
most dwarfs die between 3 and 8 years of age because of infections, degenerative
diseases, or neurologic dysfunction.f
Immunodeficient dwarfism in Weimaraners is characterized by puppies that appear
normal at birth, exhibiting a wasting syndrome at a few weeks of age. 370 • 371 Clinical signs
include unthriftiness, emaciation, lethargy, and persistent infections, usually resulting in
death.
Delayed growth has been described in sibling German shepherd dogs.364 Two dogs
had histologic evidence of hypopituitarism, and two dogs had normal serum concentrations
of growth hormone, T 4 , 'and cortisol. In contrast with German shepherd dogs with pituitary dwarfism, these dogs had no dermatologic abnormalities and eventually reached
normal stature.
DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes congenital hypothyroidism with dwarfism, juvenile diabetes mellitus, gonadal dysgenesis, malnutrition, severe metabolic diseases (portacaval
shunts, congenital renal disease, and congenital heart defects), and skeletal dysplasias
(chondrodysplasia in Alaskan malamutes, pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia in Miniature
poodles, and mucopolysaccharidosis) .1, 2 Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination findings, laboratory test results, skin biopsy, radiography, the presence of
insulin-induced hypoglycemia, and the results of GH stimulation tests. Depending on the
degree of anterior pituitary insufficiency, affected dogs may have laboratory findings
consistent with hypothyroidism and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency. Immunodeficient dwarf Weimaraners have deficient lymphocyte blastogenic responses to phytomitogens, as well as thymic cortical hypoplasia. 37o, 37 \

FIGURE 10-10. Pituitary dwarf
with a normal littermate.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 821
Histopathologic examination of the skin reveals changes consistent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, sebaceous gland
atrophy, epidermal melanosis, and thin dermis)." A highly suggestive finding is the decreased amount and size of dermal elastin fibers (see Figs. 10-12 and 10-13). In cases
with concurrent hypothyroidism, histopathologic findings may include vacuolated or hypertrophied arrector pili muscles.
Radiography may reveal delayed closure of growth plates of long bones, delayed
eruption of permanent teeth, failure of the os penis to mineralize completely by 1 year of
age, open fontanelles of the skull, and smaller-than-normal heart, liver, and kidney.!' 2, ll, 349
A characteristic metabolic abnormality of GH-deficient dogs is hypersensitivity to the
hypoglycemic effect of insulin.l- 2, ll, 355 The IV injection of regular insulin at 0.025
units/kg into GH-deficient dogs produces severe, prolonged hypoglycemia.
Basal plasma GH levels (by RIA) in normal dogs vary from 1 to 4.5 ng/ml in most
reports.'- 2, II However, basal GH levels in pituitary dwarfs and hypophysectomized dogs
may come close to these values. Thus, basal GH levels are inadequate for the documentation of GH deficiency. Clonidine (an a-adrenergic antihypertensive drug) and xylazine
have been used to stimulate GH release in the dog and to document the existence of GH
deficiency.!, 2. ll, 347, 355 Normal dogs show a marked increase in plasma GH and insulin-like
growth factor (IGF-l) levels within 15 to 30 minutes after the IV injection of 10 to
30 ILg/kg of clonidine or 100 to 300 ILg/kg of xylazine, whereas pituitary dwarfs and
hypophysectomized dogs do not respond.P" Hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and
sex hormone abnormalities must always be ruled out because they can impair GH secretion. These hormones can be evaluated Singularly or by the rapid sequential injection of
the various stimulating or releasing hormones.v 9, 356
The measurement of plasma IGF-1 levels could also be diagnostic « 5 ng/ml) for
growth hormone deficiency, but test results must be evaluated in light of the size of the
dog.!, 2, 355 Heterozygous carriers of the pituitary dwarfism trait have intermediate levels of
plasma IGF-l compared with dwarfs and normal dogs. In some instances, it may be of
value to assess both GH and IGF-llevels.1,2,368
Human or bovine GHRF has been used to evaluate GH responses in the dog.'- 2, 344, 359
When administered to normal dogs at a dose of 1 ILg/kg, GHRF produced a twofold to
fourfold increase in GH levels, whereas there was no response in dogs with hyposomatotropism.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should be made aware of the chronic nature of the disease, the general
unavailability of GH for treatment, and the animal's shortened life expectancy. If the
owner is willing to accept these possibilities, the dwarf dog can be kept as a pet.
Concurrent hypothyroidism-'" or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency necessitate additional specific therapy with levothyroxine or glucocorticoids, respectively. If secondary
adrenocortical insufficiency is present, this should always be treated first.
Bovine GH (10 IV subcutaneously, every other day for 30 days) and porcine
GH (2 IV subcutaneously, every other day, or 0.1 IV/kg subcutaneously, three times
weekly, for 4 to 6 weeks) have been used experimentally to treat canine pituitary dwarfism.'- 2, ll, 349, 355 A beneficial response to GH in the skin and haircoat occurs within 6 to 8
weeks. However, growth plates close rapidly, and no appreciable increase in stature is
achieved. Although not reported during the treatment of canine pituitary dwarfism, repeated injections of bovine and porcine GH could result in hypersensitivity reactions.r'"
diabetes mellitus, or acromegalic-like bone changes."! Antibody production to bovine GH
can occur and block its activity.366
Progestin administration to normal dogs increases growth hormone and IGF-l concentrations in the blood (see Acrornegalyl.P'" 378, 379 These hormones arise from the
mammary ductile epithelium. When four intact dwarf German shepherds, two male and
two female, were given medroxyprogesterone acetate (5 or 10 mg/kg subcutaneously every

822 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
third week), all dogs grew a normal coat. 3,58, 401 As expected, the progestin administration
increased the plasma growth hormone and IGF-l1evels. The latter probably was responsible for the coat regrowth. 362 Long-term follow-up data was reported for two dogs. In
these animals, a maintenance dosage of 5 mg/kg every sixth week was used. Both dogs
maintained their haircoat and were healthy 3 to 4 years after the initiation of treatment.
They both had repeated episodes of pyoderma, the male had some acromegalic features,
and the bitch had to be neutered for a progestin-induced pyometra.F" Refinement of the
treatment protocol might eliminate some of the side effects.

Hyposomatotropism in the Mature Dog
Hyposomatotropism (pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, or GH-responsive dermatosis) is a rare
condition resulting in a bilaterally symmetric alopecia in the mature dog.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The cause and the pathogenesis of this disorder are unknown." Clonidine or xylazine
stimulation tests have documented inadequate or absent GH secretion in some but not all
dogs. 368 When 95 dogs with clinical signs compatible with hyposomatotropism were studied, 32 (34%) had a normal GH response test result.P? In addition, serum IGF-l levels
were normal in dogs with an abnormal GH response. IGF-l should be decreased with
true GH deficiency. When 12 normally coated Pomeranians and 7 with hyposomatotropism were studied, all dogs showed no significant increase in GH levels after xylazine or
human GHRF administration.F" All dogs also had abnormal adrenal sex hormone synthesis, suggestive of a partial deficiency of the 21-hydroxylase enzyme. These factors, coupled
with normal pituitary morphologic findings in one of two dogs at necropsy.'! shed doubts
on the primary role of GH in this condition. The GH deficiency could be induced by the
abnormal adrenal steroid synthesis368, 383 or could be a coincidental endocrinopathy, which
mayor may not contribute to the hair loss in these dogs, 11, 412
Two adult Poodles with typical clinical signs of adult-onset hyposomatotropism had
fluctuating but low GH levels that showed no response to clonidine or GHRH, but the
dogs had normal levels of IGF-l,368 The authors suggested that both dogs had a mild and
fluctuating hyperadrenocorticism with resultant glucocorticoid-caused suppression of somatostatin release.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Hyposomatotropism has been reported predominantly in male dogs of many different
breeds, but especially in Chow Chow, Keeshond, Pomeranian, Miniature Poodle, Samoyed, and American water spaniel breeds. 34,5, 3,59 Because four of these breeds, namely the
Chow Chow, Keeshond, Pomeranian, and Samoyed, are over-represented in adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome, it is very likely that any growth hormone irregularity in these
dogs is a coincidental or secondary problem. Age at onset is between 9 months and 11
years, with about 50% of the affected dogs being younger than 2 years of age. The first
noticeable change in the coat is a gradual loss of primary hairs with retention of secondary
hairs, giving the coat a puppy-like appearance. With time, all hairs are lost around the
neck, pinnae, tail, and caudomedial thighs (see Fig. 1O-9E). As those areas become
alopecic, the truncal primary hairs are lost gradually and then the secondary hairs become
more sparse. Complete truncal alopecia is uncommon, even in chronic cases. In many
dogs, the exposed skin hyperpigments rapidly (see Fig. 1O-9F). A small number of these
dogs have hair loss, with or without hyperpigmentation, restricted symmetrically to the
flank region (Fig. 10_11).386, 412 Hairs in affected areas are often easily epilated. In
chronic cases, the skin may be thin and hypotonic. In cases in which skin biopsies had

"See references 14, 345, 359, 368, 372, 373, 376,

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 823

FIGURE 10-11. Hyposomatotropism. Symmetric flank alopecia.

been performed, the hair grew back over the biopsy sites. The dogs are normal except for
the dermatologic signs.
Airedales, Boxers, and English bulldogs experience a seasonal disease in which flank
alopecia and hyperpigmentation develop in winter or spring. The low GH levels in these
dogs may be spurious because a seasonal follicular dysplasia is also described in these
same breeds (see Chaps. 11 and 12). Alternatively, the low GH levels may be caused by
the hormones responsible for the hair loss or may be real. 389 In the last case, the GH
deficiency would be a co-contributor to the hair loss. By itself, it causes no hair loss but
makes the hair follicles more sensitive to the effects of other hormones.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis includes hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and gonadal or
adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings, laboratory results that rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, and response
to therapy. Skin biopsy reveals changes consistent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, epidermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy, and
thin dermis)." A highly suggestive histopathologic finding is decreased amounts and small
size of dermal elastin fibers (Figs. 10-12 and 10-13), but this finding may be present
only in dogs that have been clinically affected for 2 years or longer. 376 Measurements of
plasma GH and IGF-l levels before and after the IV injection of clonidine or xylazine
documents GH deficiency, but this testing is not routinely available in most laboratories.
In dogs with seasonal GH deficiency (Airedales, Boxers, and English bulldogs), xylazine
responses are suppressed during the period of hair loss but become normal with hair
regrowth. ll Hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and sex hormone abnormalities must
always be ruled out before GH test results are interpreted because these conditions
impair GH secretion. I, 2, 355, 376

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Until the pathogenic mechanism of this disorder is completely defined, treatment recommendations are difficult. Some dogs with documented GH deficiency respond to GH
supplementation, whereas others do not. Additionally, some dogs regrow the coat with

824 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-12. Normal canine skin. Numerous
thick, long elastin bundles and fibers are present in the
dermis (Verhoeff's stain). (From Parker WM, Scott
DW: Growth hormone-responsive alopecia in the mature dog: A discussion of 13 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 16:824, 1980.)

neutering, testosterone supplementation, or treatment with o,p'-DDD.373 In light of those
facts and the fact that GH, beyond that marketed for milk production in cows, is not
available to veterinarians on a routine and regular basis, most investigators suggest that
these animals be treated initially as if they had a gonadal or adrenal sex hormone
imbalance. If there is no response to those treatments, GH supplementation is indicated.
Response to bovine, porcine, and human GH has been reported.r'" 355, 372 although
ovine GH was ineffective.F" Original treatment protocols suggested that dogs weighing
less than 14 kg be given 2.5 IV, whereas larger dogs receive 5 IV. These doses are given
subcutaneously every other day for 10 treatments. Newer reports suggest dosages of
0.1 IUlkg three times weekly for 6 weeks 355 or 0.015 IV/kg twice weekly for the same
period.F" The recombinant bovine growth hormone available for dairy cattle cannot be
diluted down to these doses. Because GH is a diabetogenic agent, a fasting blood sugar
level should be obtained before treatment and weekly thereafter. If hyperglycemia occurs,
the injections should be discontinued immediately; otherwise, an irreversible diabetic
condition may develop. Other side effects include acromegaly and hypersensitivity to the
protein of origin of the GH.345.368 The latter has occurred with both recombinant human
and bovine growth hormone. Autoantibody production with loss of efficacy is another
problem recognized with those agents. 262 If response is to occur, it should be seen within
3 months. Most dogs start to lose hair again within 3 to 36 months. Retreatment should
produce another remission.
Although the pathogenic mechanism of this disorder is unknown, the high number of
cases within certain breeds suggest some genetic influence.359, 380 Affected dogs should not
be used for breeding.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 825

FIGURE 10-13. Hyposomatotropism (growth hormone-responsive dermatosis) in a dog. Marked absence of dermal elastin (Verhoeff's stain). (From
Parker WM, Scott DW: Growth hormone-responsive
alopecia in the mature dog: A discussion of 13 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:824, 1980.)

Acromegaly
Acromegaly is due to hypersecretion of GH in the mature animal. It is a rare disease in
dogs and cats.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Acromegaly is caused by hypersecretion of GH in the mature animal (after epiphyseal
closure). Hypersecretion of GH results in an overgrowth of connective tissue, bone, and
viscera. In the dog, acromegaly has been reported in association with injections of anterior
pituitary gland extracts, acidophilic hyperplasia or adenoma of the anterior pituitary gland,
diestrus in the intact cycling bitch, and administration of progestational compounds."
Some acromegalic changes were induced in two pituitary dwarfs treated with methylprogesterone acetate.P" In these dogs, the growth hormone was produced by mammary
tissue. 382 In the cat, acromegaly has been associated with pituitary tumors.l- 2. 353. 365
CLINICAL FEATURES

Canine Acromegaly
No breed or age predilections are evident, but most cases occur in middle-aged to old
dogs. Because progestational stimulation is the most common cause of acromegaly in dogs,
"See references 1, 2, 351, 354, 357, 365, 375, 377, 378.

826 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-14. Acromegaly. Acromegalic beagle (center) and two normallittennates.

FIGURE 10-15. Acromegaly. Note large head and
paws.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 827

most cases occur in intact females. Male or female dogs being treated with progestational
compounds are at risk. The most common signs noted include inspiratory stridor (due to
soft tissue increases in the orolingual-oropharyngeal regions), increased body size (especially paws and skull) (Figs. 10-14 and 10-15), abdominal enlargement, polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, fatigue, frequent panting, prognathism, widening of the interdental spaces,
and galactorrhea. 365 Cutaneous changes include thickened, myxedematous skin thrown into
excessive folds, hypertrichosis, and thick hard claws.
Feline Acromegaly

No breed or age predilections are reported, but more than 90% of cases occur in male
cats. Clinical signs include increased body size (especially paws and skull), prognathism,
widened interdental spaces, organomegaly, dyspnea due to cardiac failure, cardiomegaly,
neurologic signs with large tumors, and polyuria and polydipsia with or without renal
failure. 36,5 Skin changes are the same as those described for the dog but are usually not
marked.
Both dogs and cats with acromegaly can have insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus.v"
Although the diabetes occurs later than the other signs, it may be the only complaint at
presentation. The changes in the skin or body may be subtle or pronounced but go
unnoticed because they occur gradually.

DIAGNOSIS
The definitive diagnosis of acromegaly is based on history, physical examination findings,
serum chemistry studies, skin biopsy, persistent elevation of plasma GH levels, altered
response of GH levels to stimulation with clonidine, GHRH, or IV glucose administration.'- 2, 3,54, 36,5, 37,5 Many acromegalic dogs have mild to moderate hyperglycemia and mild
to severe elevations of serum alkaline phosphatase levels. Nonsuppressibility of plasma GH
levels after an IV glucose load is considered a hallmark of acromegaly. The levels of
plasma GH do not always correlate with the degree of acromegaly. GH levels may also be
elevated in response to stress, acute illness, chronic renal and liver disease, diabetes
mellitus, and starvation.1, 2 The measurement of plasma IGF-1 levels (mean, 679 ::+:: 116
ng/ml in acromegalic dogs; mean, 280 ::+:: 23 ng/ml in normal German shepherds) could
also be diagnostic but must be evaluated in light of the size of the dog. 1. 2, 3,54
In dogs and human beings, histologic examination of acromegalic skin reveals collagenous hyperplasia, myxedema, and hyperplasia of the epidermis and appendages (Figs.
10-16 and 10_17).375

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Dogs with acromegaly associated with diestrus or with progestational compound treatment
have responded well to ovariohysterectomy and to cessation of progestogen therapy,
respectively.F" 36,5 Soft tissue changes resolve slowly, but skeletal changes are likely to be
permanent. Aside from pituitary irradiation, no successful form of treatment has been
described for the cat.215

Sex Hormone Dermatoses
Dermatoses associated with sex hormones are uncommon and may be of gonadal or
adrenal origin. 1. 2, II, 14 Clinical signs typically include the absence of systemic signs and the
presence of truncal alopecia, which may be generalized or regionalized. Regionalized, or
patterned, hair loss is more common. The discussion lends itself to categorization by sex
and gonadal status, but there is great overlap in each category,

828 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10- 16. Acromegaly. Papillated hyperplasia and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.

FIGURE 10- 17. Acromegaly. Collagenous hyperplasia.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 829

HYPERESTROGENISM IN FEMALE ANIMALS
Hyperestrogenism in the female dog is a rare disorder characterized by bilaterally
symmetric alopecia, enlargement of the vulva and nipples, and estrous cycle abnormalities. 394, 396, 408, 414 Hyperestrogenism in the cat has been been reported only once,403
Cause and Pathogenesis

This disorder is usually associated with cystic ovaries and rarely with functional ovarian
tumors,396,417 Most estrogen-producing ovarian neoplasms are granulosa-theca cell in origin, and 10% to 20% are malignant. 1, 2 These tumors may also produce progesterone,
which causes mammary hypertrophy. Cases have been recognized in neutered females
with normal adrenal function.F" The cause of the hyperestrogenism is unknown, but it
may be due to abnormalities in peripheral conversion of sex hormones or an ectopic
source of production.
Estrogenic substances have been administered to dogs by a number of investigators,
resulting in cutaneous syndromes identical to the naturally occurring disease. An identical
syndrome may also occur with overdoses of estrogens used to treat mismating and urinary
incontinence after ovariohysterectorny.P"- 421 Some dogs have cutaneous hyperestrogenism
(normal blood estrogen levels) owing to increased numbers of cutaneous estrogen receptors.390
Clinical Features

Hyperestrogenism associated with polycystic ovaries usually occurs in the middle-aged,
intact female dog. English bulldogs may be predisposed to the disorder. 1, 2 Hyperestrogenism associated with functional ovarian neoplasia usually occurs in older intact females, and
no breed predilections are reported. The disorder is characterized by bilaterally symmetric
alopecia beginning in the perineal, inguinal, and flank regions (see Fig. 1O-9G and H).
The hair loss remains confined to these areas for long periods but can progress to involve
the entire trunk in chronic cases. Hairs in affected areas are easily epilated. In some dogs,
the hair loss is confined to the flank area and the degree of hair loss can vary with the
estrous cycle.
The nipples and vulva are enlarged (Fig. 1O-18A), and comedones are usually numerous on the ventrum and vulvar skin. With additional progestational stimulation, the mammary glands enlarge. Secondary seborrheic changes can occur, but skin infections are
uncommon. Estrous cycle abnormalities (irregular cycles, prolonged estrus, and nymphomania) often occur, and endometritis or pyometra may be seen. In the cat, truncal
alopecia was associated with persistent estrus.v"
Diagnosis

In the intact female, the diagnosis is straightforward if the dog has both estral and
cutaneous changes. With a history of poor estrus, tumor or incompletely excised ovarian
tissue, or estrogen administration without the history of same, the diagnosis is more
difficult and the primary differential diagnostic considerations include hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism, arid follicular dysplasia. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination findings, laboratory test results that rule out other conditions, and
response to therapy. Skin biopsy differentiates hyperestrogenism from follicular dysplasia
and other nonendocrine follicular disorders but does not differentiate this condition from
other endocrine disorders. Changes include orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, epidermal melanosis, and sebaceous gland atrophy (Fig. 10-19).16
Elevated blood estrogen levels may support the diagnosis. An hCG response test can be
useful in detecting hormonal changes in tumors that are not too large. Ultrasonography
and laparoscopy are useful for delineating ovarian neoplasms. 1, 2, 396
Clinical Management

Therapy for hyperestrogenism in the intact female dog consists of ovariohysterectomy. A
good response is usually evident within 3 months but occasionally does not occur for 6

830 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10- 18. A, Hyperestrogenism. Note the hypertrophied, hyperpigmented vulva. B, Estrogen-responsive
dermatosis. Ventral alopecia and juvenile nipples. C, Estrogen-responsive dermatosis. Perineal hair loss with small
recessed vulva. D, Hypertrichosis in an estrogen-responsive Irish setter. E, Flank alopecia in an intact female with
hypogonadism. F, Alopecia and hyperpigmentation in a bitch in overt pseudopregnancy. G, Testosterone-responsive
dermatosis. Dull dry coat with coat color change. H, Linear preputial dermatosis in a dog with a Sertoli's cell tumor.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 83 I

FIGURE 10-19. Hyperestrogenism in a dog. Note follicular keratosis and plugging, absence of hair shafts, and sebaceous gland atrophy.

months. Symptomatic therapy with topical antiseborrheic agents may be indicated. If an
ovarian neoplasm is suspected, chest radiographs should be taken before surgery. No
successful treatment of neutered females with nonovarian hyperestrogenism has been
described.F'

ESTROGEN-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS OF FEMALE ANIMALS
Estrogen-responsive dermatosis is a rare, bilaterally symmetric alopecia of unknown etiology seen in spayed female dogs. 412 The condition is extremely rare in cats.
Cause and Pathogenesis

The cause and the pathogenesis of estrogen-responsive dermatosis in female dogs are
unknown.F" Hypoestrogenism has been suggested as the cause of this endocrine-like
dermatosis. In most cases, low estrogen levels cannot be documented. Investigators have
seen positive responses to estrogen supplementation in some intact female animals that
experience dermatoses before their first estrus, during pseudopregnancy, or in association
with an abnormal estrous cycle. The role of estrogens in the response of those dogs is
uncertain, and it is best to reserve the term estrogen-responsive dermatosis for neutered
females.
Clinical Features

Estrogen-responsive dermatosis is usually first noticed when the dog is a young adult (2 to
4 years). No age or breed predilections are documented, but most reported cases involve
Dachshunds and Boxers. In shorthaired dogs, the dermatosis is characterized by hypotrichosis that begins in the perineal and genital regions. Diffuse alopecia results and can
affect the caudomedial thighs, the ventral abdomen, the thorax, the neck, and the postauricular region of the head (see Fig. 1O-18B and C). Hairs in affected areas are easily
epilated. The nipples and the vulva are often infantile. Some dogs have only bilateral flank
alopecia. In longhaired dogs, the first noticeable change is loss of primary hairs, giving the
coat a puppy-like quality. Hair loss starts in the flank region and progresses slowly (Fig.
10....:20). Some Irish setters with this condition present for hypertrichosis with blending of
the retained hairs (see Fig. 1O-18D). Any dog with this condition can have secondary

832 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE
10-20.
Estrogenresponsive dermatosis. Loss of primary hairs and flank alopecia.

seborrheic skin disease, but this is uncommon. Dogs with estrogen-responsive dermatosis
are usually normal otherwise, but concurrent estrogen-responsive urinary incontinence
occurs occasionally. In cats, symmetric truncal alopecia, especially of the ventrum, may
occur.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis varies with the presentation. With persistent ventral hair loss,
the primary differential diagnostic possibility is patterned baldness. Careful review of the
history can help differentiate the conditions. In both cases, the dogs have normal puppy
coats and shed them at the appropriate time. With patterned baldness, the coat that
regrows is sparser and finer than normal and continues to worsen. In dogs with estrogenresponsive dermatosis, a normal adult coat develops that is maintained for variable periods
of time before the hair loss begins. With other presentations, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, hyposomatotropism, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicular dysplasia
must be considered. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
laboratory test results that rule out other conditions, and response to therapy. Skin biopsy
eliminates nonendocrine causes of the hair loss but otherwise is nondiagnostic, revealing
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, follicular atrophy, follicular dilatation,
and telogenization of hair follicles (Fig. 10_21).4,16
Clinical Management

Traditionally, this condition has been treated with diethylstilbestrol, given orally at doses
of 0.1 to 1 mg. Some investigators give the drug every other day, whereas other clinicians
give it daily for 3 weeks, stop treatment for 1 week, and then repeat the cycle.'! The
latter scheme was developed to spare the bone marrow'P because dogs are susceptible to
sometimes irreversible bone marrow depression (thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, and anemia) with long-term administration. No data are available to indicate that either approach
is safer or more effective. The drug is given as described until hair regrows, and then the
frequency of administration is slowly reduced to a maintenance dose of once to twice
weekly.
Diethylstilbestrol tablets are difficult if not impossible to obtain, and the small tablet
size makes division into smaller doses difficult, often thus precluding the treatment of
small dogs. Estradiol and various conjugated or esterified estrogens are available through
pharmaceutical houses and may be beneficial in dogs. We have used estradiol in a few

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 833

FIGURE 10-21. Estrogen-responsive dermatosis. Note follicular keratosis and plugging and
absence of hair shafts.

dogs and noted a positive response with no apparent side effects. Before a substitute for
diethylstilbestrol is dispensed, its potency relative to diethylstilbestrol should be determined. When estrogens cannot be used, response may occur with the daily administration
of methyltestosterone or mibolerone (Cheque Drops, Upjohn), Methyltestosterone is given
at 1 mg/kg with a maximal dose of 30 mg, whereas the mibolerone is given at 30 /Lg for
dogs weighing less than 11 kg and at 50 /Lg for dogs weighing between 11 and 23 kg. The
drug is given until hair regrows and then tapered to a maintenance level. These agents are
controlled substances because of their anabolic nature and should be dispensed carefully.

HYPOGONADISM IN INTACT FEMALE ANIMALS
The term hypogonadism indicates a decrease or abnormality in the functional activity of
the gonads. The condition can result from primary gonadal abnormalities or irregularities
in the hormonal control mechanisms. Bitches with hypogonadism can present for infertility, coat changes, or both.
Cause and Pathogenesis

A variety of disorders of sexual development (primary hypogonadism) have been described.I. 2 Many conditions have been discovered at neutering or when the bitch's cycle
failed to occur. Because the gonadal problem is identified early, coat changes are uncommon in these dogs. If the reproductive irregularity is overlooked, hair loss can occur.
miniature Poodles, Terriers, and Dachshunds may be predisposed.t'"
Secondary hypogonadism is much more common. The dog's history includes an irregular estrous pattern, an increasing interestrous interval, or complete anestrus. If these
estral irregularities develop after the dog has had a normal cycle for years, the hypogonadism is due to some systemic illness, typically of the endocrine system. Hypothyroidism and
hyperadrenocorticism are the most common causes.': 2
All nonpregnant bitches go through a phase of pseudopregnancy in diestrus. In some
dogs, the pseudopregnancy becomes clinical, with the development of preparturient behaviors and mammary activity. Dogs with clinical pseudopregnancy appear to have normal
diestrus hormonal changes but, for some unknown reason, are sensitive to thern.l- 2

834 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
Clinical Features

The nature of the hair loss that can occur in these dogs varies with the cause of the cyclic
abnormality. With primary hypogonadism, there are no clinical or cytologic signs of estrus.
Hair loss starts early in life (younger than 3 years), first in the perineal and inguinal
regions, with slow progression along the ventrum and trunk,403 With irregular cycles or
increasing interestrous intervals, the hair loss starts around the heat period, gradually
worsens through the cycle, and then spontaneously resolves months after the cycle is
completed.s'" As the interestrous interval increases, the length of the hair loss phase
increases. With complete anestrus, the hair loss is persistent.
In dogs with short to medium-length coats, the hair loss associated with cyclic
abnormalities occurs in the flank region and occasionally in the perineum (see Fig.
1O-18E). In some dogs, the hair loss remains restricted to these areas, even with the
development of complete anestrus, whereas it progresses to truncal alopecia in other dogs.
The truncal alopecia is a late event and follows multiple cycles of hair loss and regrowth.
In longhaired dogs, especially those with dense undercoats, the cutaneous manifestation of
the cyclic abnormality is usually a change in the quality of the coat long before any hair
loss is seen. The dog gradually loses its primary hairs on the trunk and has a puppy-like
coat. When hair loss starts, it is usually first noted in the collar area, the flanks, and the
posterior thighs. Progression to generalized truncal alopecia is slow.
In dogs with clinical pseudopregnancy, the hair loss usually is first noticed 4 to 6
weeks after estrus and involves the collar area, the rump, and the mammary region (see
Fig. 1O-18F).412 An occasional dog has flank alopecia. The hair loss can become more
widespread at subsequent estrous cycles. Behavioral and physical signs (mammary development and lactation) of clinical pseudopregnancy are present.
Diagnosis

When the hair loss is cyclic and has a temporal relationship to an estrous cycle or occurs
in an intact but anestrous bitch, the diagnosis of an ovarian-induced hair loss is straightforward. Other differential diagnostic possibilities include excessive shedding and seasonal
flank alopecia. When the hair loss is non cyclic, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism,
hyposomatotropism, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicular dysplasia must be
considered. Skin biopsy eliminates nonendocrine causes of the hair loss but does not
indicate an ovarian cause.
Because hypogonadism in the adult dog is typically secondary to an underlying endocrine disorder, all dogs with an increasing interestrous interval should be tested for
hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism. If results of these tests are normal, an ovarian
dysfunction is likely. The tentative diagnosis can often be supported by measurement
of sex hormone levels; with abnormalities in estrogen, progesterone, or testosterone
levels40 2 , 403; or by response to neutering.
Clinical Management

Dogs with hypogonadism experience coat regrowth with neutering or, if the hair loss is
cyclic, do not lose their coat again. If the owner does not wish to neuter the dog and
there is no other intercurrent endocrine disorder, the case should be referred to a
theriogenologist for evaluation and treatment. Although there are reports of hair regrowth
and return to estrous function with administration of GnRH (2 JLg/kg 1M twice at lO-day
intervals), FSH (0.75 to 2 IU/kg 1M daily until signs of proestrus occur), FSH (20 IU/kg
1M for 10 days) followed by weekly injections of human chorionic gonadotropin (35
IUlkg), long-term efficacy of these treatments is unknown.P" 403 If hypothyroidism or
hyperadrenocorticism is documented, correction of that condition can return the dog to
normal reproductive function with subsequent hair regrowth. In some dogs, the ovarian
dysfunction persists and the animal must be neutered.
HYPERANDROGENISM IN MALE DOGS
Documented hyperandrogenism in the male dog is rare and has not been reported in the
cat. It can cause circumanal gland and tail gland hyperplasia, with or without seborrhea

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 835

oleosa, in dogs with testicular neoplasia.v- 419 Hyperandrogenism is a suspected cause of
seborrhea oleosa or truncal endocrine alopecia in oversexed intact male dogs. l1
Cause and Pathogenesis

The circumanal glands and the tail gland of the dog are composed of the same glandular
("hepatoid") tissue, This tissue as well as the sebaceous glands is androgen responsive.
Hypertestosteronemia, usually in association with testicular neoplasia (especially interstitial
cell tumorsi.v" results in glandular hyper-reactivity with hyperplasia and increased secretion.
Clinical Features

Dogs with idiopathic hyperandrogenism have severe seborrheic disease or, rarely, symmetric truncal hair loss.384 The seborrhea is greasy and is most pronounced on the face, on
the ears, and in the intertriginous areas (feet, axillae, and groin). Infection and pruritus
are common, which worsens the condition. The hair loss in some dogs mimics that of
other endocrine conditions. All dogs with idiopathic hyperandrogenism show hypersexual
behavior, aggression to other dogs or humans, or both.
Hyperandrogenism due to testicular neoplasia causes circumanal gland hyperplasia,
The glands around the anus enlarge uniformly, resulting in a donut-like appearance (Fig.
10-22). Tail gland hyperplasia appears as an oval enlargement of the dorsal surface of the
proximal tail (Fig. 10-23). In advanced cases, the area becomes alopecic and greasy, and

FIGURE 10-22. Dog with interstitial cell tumor
of testicle and hypertestosteronemia. Circumanal
gland hyperplasia and macular melanosis.

836 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-23. Same dog as in Figure 10-22.
Alopecia, macular melanosis, and hypertrophy of tail
gland.

the glandular hyperplasia can become so severe that multiple nodules or cysts or both
occur in the area. Because circumanal glands can also be found in the perineum and the
inguinal area, nodular lesions can be present elsewhere. Some dogs have macular melanosis of the tail gland, the perianal area, the scrotum, the ventral tail, and the ventral
abdomen (Fig. 10-24) before, simultaneously with, or after the glandular hyperplasia
occurs. A testicular mass can usually be palpated in these dogs but may not be appreciable when the skin lesions are first noted.
Diagnosis

Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings, determination of blood testosterone levels, and response to castration. Testicular ultrasonography may be helpful in
detecting small nonpalpable tumors.P'' Histopathologic examination of the testicular tumor
usually reveals an interstitial cell neoplasm. No cause of idiopathic hyperandrogenism has
been found.
Clinical Management

Castration is indicated for these dogs. In idiopathic hyperandrogenism, the skin gradually
returns to normal condition in 2 to 4 months, but the behavioral changes can last longer
and may necessitate behavior modification. In seborrheic dogs, frequent bathing with an
appropriate antiseborrheic shampoo hastens the dog's response. Castration of the dog with
glandular hyperplasia prevents any worsening of the condition but may not return the dog
to normal status. Some of the glandular hyperplasia is irreversible, as is the overlying hair
loss. The macular melanosis fades slowly during 6 months.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 837

FIGURE 10-24. Same dog as in Figures 10-22 and 10-23. Note enlarged scrotum and macular
melanosis of scrotum and perianal area.

TESTOSTERONE-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS OF MALE ANIMALS
Testosterone-responsive dermatosis (hypoandrogenism) is a rare, bilaterally symmetric alopecia of unknown cause in castrated male dogs.402.412 The condition is even rarer in the
cat.
Cause and Pathogenesis

The cause and the pathogenesis of testosterone-responsive dermatosis in male dogs are
unknown. Hypoandrogenism has been suggested but not documented as the cause of this
endocrine-like dermatosis.
Clinical Findings

This condition is rare and occurs in old castrated males. Afghan hounds may be predisposed.f" Some authors include intact dogs with testicular abnormalities or tumors in this
category because some affected animals show transient response to testosterone, but we
think that those cases should be described elsewhere (hypogonadism, testicular tumor)
because they are not idiopathic. Castrated males with this condition first have a dull, dry
coat with or without other seborrheic changes (Fig. 10-25). Dogs with dark brown or
black haircoats often show coat color change to light brown or auburn, respectively,
before hair loss is noted (see Fig. 1O-18G). The hair loss in these dogs is truncal, is
slowly progressive, and mimics that of other endocrine disorders. The skin may be thin
and hypotonic. Rarely, the dog has hypertrichosis.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis includes hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, hyposomatotropism, and adrenal sex hormone imbalance. Definitive diagnosis is made by history, physical
examination findings, laboratory test results that rule out other conditions, and response to
therapy. Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal
atrophy, follicular keratosis, follicular atrophy, follicular dilatation, telogenization of hair
follicles, thin dermis, and sebaceous gland atrophy.!"

838 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-25. Testosterone-responsive dermatosis, Note thinning, hypotonicity, and scaling.

Clinical Management

Therapy consists of methyltestosterone given orally at 1 mg/kg, up to a maximal total dose
of 30 mg, every other day.'! Mibolerone (Cheque Drops, Upjohn) per the manufacturer's
recommendations also is effective. A good response should be evident within 3 months. At
this point, a maintenance dose may be established (once or twice weekly). Large doses of
anabolic steroids may result in seborrhea oleosa, cholestatic liver disease, and behavioral
changes (aggression). Because anabolic steroids are abused substances in humans, drug
use should be monitored carefully.
TESTICULAR NEOPLASIA AND THE SKIN
Testicular neoplasia is common in the dog. Data suggest an approximately equal frequency
of occurrence of interstitial cell tumors, seminomas, and Sertoli's cell tumorsY· 405 A 10year survey of all canine testicular tumors examined at the College of Veterinary Medicine
at Cornell identified 1971 tumors with the following breakdown: interstitial cell tumor,
750 (38.1%); seminoma, 690 (35%); and Sertoli's cell tumor, 531 (26.9%)Y Combinations
of tumor types in the same or contralateral testicle occur in approximately 25% of cases.405
Cryptorchid testes are more than 10 times more likely to develop tumor, especially
Sertoli's cell tumor or seminoma. Canine testicular tumors, except for interstitial cell
tumors, occur more frequently in the right testis in either the normal or cryptorchid
location.': 2. 405
Testicular tumors can reduce fertility392 by direct destruction of the testis or by the
abnormal secretion of hormones, can be malignant with metastatic potential, and can
cause many cutaneous abnormalities, especially endocrine alopecia. Sertoli's cell tumors
and seminomas are more likely to cause hair loss than are interstitial cell tumors. When
the clinician examines an old male dog with a palpable scrotal testicular tumor or a
marked testicular asymmetry suggesting an unidentified tumor, the basic quandary is
whether the tumor is the cause of the hair loss or a coincidental finding with no
dermatologic Significance. When the dog has one or more of the following abnormalities,
the tumor is likely to be functionally Significant and the dog should be castrated:
(1) puppy-like coat, (2) patterned alopecia, (3) coat color change, (4) linear preputial

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 839

dermatosis, (5) macular melanosis, (6) uniform circumanal gland hyperplasia, (7) tail gland
hyperplasia, and (8) numerous comedones.
Sex steroids appear to have preferential affinity for primary hair follicles. Disorders
caused by sex steroids tend to cause the dog to lose its primary hairs first while retaining
the secondary hairs, giving the puppy-like coat.
Because of the presumed sex and site variation in the numbers or affinity of sex
hormone receptors in the skin of dogs, sex steroid imbalances induce hair loss in certain
regions of the body and the alopecia tends to be confined to these areas for long
pertods.l- 418 Coat color change can be explained by environmental bleaching or a direct
effect of the sex hormones on pigment production and transfer. The latter is probably
most important.
Linear preputial dermatosis is a term used to describe a linear narrow pigmentary
change running from the preputial orifice along the ventral aspect of the prepuce to the
scrotum (see Fig. 1O-18H).398 The exact mechanism of the development of the lesion is
unknown (Fig. 10-26), but it is not associated with trauma and appears to be a specific
cutaneous marker for testicular neoplasia, especially tumors that produce estrogens. If a
dog has linear preputial dermatosis but its testes palpate normally or are intra-abdominal,
a complete ultrasonographic evaluation of the patient is indicated to locate the neoplasm. 392
Dogs with macular melanosis have multiple black macules around the anus, perineum,
ventral proximal tail, inguinal area, and scrotum (see Fig. 10-24). Typically, these are
sudden in onset and numerous. These lesions must be differentiated from lentigines. The
latter have an identical clinical appearance but are distributed more widely and can occur
in females. In addition, lentigines tend to have a gradual onset. The cause of macular

FIGURE 10-26. Linear prepucial erythema.
Beyond some mild vascular dilatation and congestion, no histologic abnormalities are present.

840 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
melanosis is unknown. Circumanal and tail gland hyperplasia results from androgenic
stimulation of the circumanal glands (see Figs. 10-22 and 10-23). This is most common
with interstitial cell tumors.v" Comedones are not specific for a sex hormone imbalance
but are common in these disorders.
The change in coat quality and color, the patterned alopecia, and comedones are not
specific to testicular tumor but also can occur in hypogonadism and adrenal sex hormone
imbalance.P" 374, 412 Testicular tumors can be functional but not yet palpable; thus, most
investigators suggest castration of the intact male dog with sex hormone signs because it is
diagnostic for neoplasia and therapeutic for both neoplasia and hypogonadism. If the
patient is a poor surgical candidate or the owner refuses to neuter the dog, the condition
may not be resolvable.
Sertoli's Cell Tumor

Sertoli's cell tumors were the least frequent in the Cornell review'! but were the most
common type of tumor to cause symmetric alopecia. Some dogs with these tumors have
no hair 10ss.392
• Cause and Pathogenesis. A syndrome of endocrine alopecia and feminization
occurs in about one third of dogs with a testicular Sertoli's cell tumor. 1, 2, 11 An identical
clinical syndrome has been reported rarely in association with testicular interstitial cell
tumors and seminomas. However, more than one type of tumor may be present in the
testis simultaneously and bilateral testicular neoplasia is not uncommon. In addition, a
hereditary syndrome of male pseudohermaphroditism, cryptorchidism, Sertoli's cell neoplasia, and feminization has been reported in Miniature schnauzers.1, 2, 387
Many investigators demonstrated increased levels of estrogens in the peripheral blood
and the neoplastic tissue of dogs with Sertoli's cell testicular neoplasia and feminization.
Hyperestrogenism results in the cutaneous, prostatic, behavioral, and hematologic abnormalities. Bilateral flank alopecia has been reported in a male dog with hyperprogesteronemia and a testicular Sertoli cell tumor. 393 Hair loss, feminization, and bone marrow
suppression have been reported with hyperestrogenemia and a testicular interstitial cell
tumor. 420
• Clinical Features. Functional Sertoli's cell tumors are most common in cryptorchid testicles. The incidence of feminization increases from about 15% with scrotally
located tumors to 50% in cases of inguinal and 70% in cases of abdominal location.
Feminization is more likely with larger tumors and tends to be increasingly severe as
tumor size increases. Although any breed of dog may be affected, Boxers, Shetland
sheepdogs, Weimaraners, Cairn terriers, Pekingese, and Collies are predisposed.1, 2, 11, 405, 422
The disease usually affects middle-aged to older dogs.
About 10% of dogs with Sertoli's cell tumors have one in both testicles, and about
20% have another tumor type. In the Cornell review, II approximately 20% of tumors had
histologic features of malignancy, but metastasis occurred in only 8% of those cases. Blood
estrogen levels are not always elevated. In addition, the hyperestrogenism could be a local
(tissue level) effect with the peripheral aromatization of androgens to estrogens.
The functional Sertoli's cell tumor feminization syndrome is characterized by varying
combinations of bilaterally symmetric alopecia, nipple enlargement, pendulous prepuce,
and attraction of other male dogs (Fig. 10-27). It is important to emphasize that affected
dogs may have alopecia, feminization, or both. The alopecia begins on the collar region,
the rump, the perineum, and the genital area and progresses slowly (Fig. 1O-28A). In
some dogs, the hair loss is restricted to the flanks (see Fig. 1O-28B). Generalized truncal
hair loss is rare. Hairs in affected areas are easily epilated. The skin may be thin or of
normal thickness. Pruritus, dermatitis, and hyperpigmentation are uncommon. Linear
preputial dermatosis (see Fig. 1O-18H) is a common but not consistent finding.
In addition to nipple enlargement and attraction of other male dogs, signs of feminization may include decreased libido and spermatogenesis. The tumor may be palpated in
a retained or scrotal testicle. The non-neoplastic testicle is usually atrophied. Caution is
warranted here because functional Sertoli's cell tumors may occur in palpably normal

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 841

FIGURE 10-27. Intrascrotal testis with Sertoli's cell tumor constituting most of the scrotal
mass. The small nodule at the posterior edge of the scrotum is the uninvolved but atrophied
testis. Note the enlarged nipples.

scrotal testicles. The prostate is often enlarged (estrogen-induced squamous metaplasia)
and infected, and there may be clinical signs referable to prostatomegaly, prostatitis, or
both. Rarefy, spermatic cord torsion with an intra-abdominal testicular Sertoli's cell tumor
occurs, resulting in an acute abdomen.t?" Estrogen-induced bone marrow depression
(thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and anemia) is uncommon to rare, but is a life-threatening complication.v" Pseudohermaphroditism in Miniature schnauzers consists of unilateral
or bilateral cryptorchidism, small penis and prepuce, feminization, and endocrine alopecia. l , 2, 387 These dogs may also have anorexia, depression, and pyrexia with concurrent
pyometra.
• Diagnosis. A dog with a palpable testicular mass and one or more of the skin
changes associated with a functional testicular tumor (e.g., patterned alopecia, linear
preputial erythema) is no diagnostic challenge. When no tumor can be palpated, the
diagnosis is more problematic and the differential diagnosis includes hypogonadism and
adrenal sex hormone imbalance. Advanced cases can mimic cases of hypothyroidism or
hyperadrenocorticism, but these are rare. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical
examination findings, laboratory tests to rule out other disorders, and response to therapy.
Ultrasonographic examination may delineate scrotal tumors that cannot be palpated.P< 404
Skin biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis,
follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair follicles, excessive trichilemmal
keratinization, and sebaceous gland atrophy (Fig. 10-29),16 Elevated blood estrogen levels
may support the diagnosis. Diagnosis is confirmed by histopathologic examination of the
neoplastic testicles,
• Clinical Management. Therapy consists of bilateral castration. Although the metastatic rate of these tumors is low, all dogs should be examined carefully before surgery. If
the spermatic cord is thickened or the sublumbar lymph nodes are enlarged, spread may
have already occurred, A good clinical response usually occurs within 3 months. Remission
followed by relapse indicates functional metastases.f" Concurrent prostatic or bone marrow disease must also be treated, Aplastic anemia or thrombocytopenia resulting from
hyperestrogenism warrants a guarded prognosis because these often persist after surgery.367

FIGURE 10-28. A, Sertoli's cell tumor. Hair loss in the collar area and along the ventrum. Pendulous
prepuce. B, Flank alopecia in an Airedale terrier with a Sertoli's cell tumor. C, Male hypogonadism in a wooly
malamute. D, Male hypogonadism. Coat color change, loss of primary hairs, and collar region alopecia. E, Male
hypogonadism. Pronounced hair loss and hyperpigmentation on the posterior thighs. F, Male hypogonadism.
Incomplete hair loss after 3 years of disease. G, Male hypogonadism. Hair loss over the rump. H, Adrenal sex
hormone imbalance. Loss of primary hairs and mild hypotrichosis.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 843

FIGURE 10-29. Skin from dog with functional Sertoli's cell testicular neoplasm syndrome.
Note follicular keratosis and dilatation, absence of hair shafts, and sebaceous gland atrophy.

Therapy of pseudohermaphroditism in Miniature schnauzers may entail simultaneous
castration and hysterectomy.
Seminomas

Seminomas are as common as interstitial cell tumors in dogs. They are more common in
cryptorchid testes.t'" Boxers and German shepherds are predisposed. Reports indicate a
low rate of malignancy but a tendency to be locally invasive.v" In the Cornell study,
12.2% of the seminomas had histologic features of malignancy, and evidence of metastasis
was recognized in 11% of those cases.'!
Secretory activity in seminomas is rare. Most cases have no dermatologic signs. If
there is secretion of estrogens, the clinical signs mimic those of Sertoli's cell tumors.
Interstitial Cell Tumors

Interstitial cell tumors are oommon.v" Boxers are predisposed. Interstitial cell tumors
have no tendency to develop in cryptorchid testes, and these tumors occur with equal
frequency in the right or the left testicle. They are often multiple in the same testicle or
can be found in both testes. Texts report rare evidence of malignancy, but 12.9% of the
tumors in the Cornell study had histologic features of malignancy." No metastatic lesions
were reported.
In most cases, interstitial cell tumors cause no dermatologic abnormalities. When
present, the signs include circumanal gland hyperplasia, tail gland hyperplasia, macular
melanosis, or combinations of these (see Fig. 10-24). Additional findings can include
prostate disease, circumanal adenoma, and perineal hernia. The association of perineal
hernia with altered sex hormone levels has largely been disproved.v? If estrogens or
progesterone are produced in the testicle or by peripheral conversion, cutaneous signs of
hyperestrogenemia or hyperprogesteronemia (hypoandrogenemia) may occur. 420

HYPOGONADISM IN INTACT MALE ANIMALS
Of all the sex hormone-related dermatoses, hypogonadism (castration-responsive dermatosis, "woolly" syndrome, alopecia X) in the male dog is the most poorly under-

844 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
stood.F" 411, 412 Dogs with this condition can either have symmetrically small and atrophic
testes or palpably normal testes.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Primary, noninflammatory testicular degeneration is rare in the adult dog. 1, 2 Dogs with
symmetric atrophy have some systemic illness, especially hypothyroidism or hyperadrenocorticism, or nonpalpable bilateral secretory testicular tumors.
A syndrome of delayed gonadal maturation has been described, especially in Afghan
hounds, Yorkshire terriers, and Miniature poodles.f" The dogs never exhibit leg-lifting
behavior, show no interest in a bitch in estrus, and experience hair loss early in life
(younger than 3 years). The external genitalia are hypoplastic.
Most dogs with hypogonadal hair loss have palpably normal testes and can be successful stud dogs. Testicular pathologic changes are rare after castration. Measurement of
serum estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone levels may show abnormalities in the
levels of one or more hormones.P'' 411, 412 but normal values are possible. 373, 400 The hair
loss in the dogs with normal levels may be due to abnormalities in the levels of some
unmeasured sex steroid, abnormalities in peripheral conversion of the sex steroids, or
some specific follicular receptor defect in which the follicle changes its sensitivity to sex
hormones. In the breeds predisposed to this condition, the follicular sensitivity no doubt
has some genetic influence. Because some of these dogs respond to melatonin supplementation, their pineal axis may also be at fault.
Clinical Features

There is no apparent breed predilection in dogs with atrophic hypogonadism. These dogs
have truncal alopecia that mimics the type occurring in testosterone-responsive dermatosis,
hypothyroidism, or hyperadrenocorticism.
Dogs with delayed gonadal maturation experience symmetric hair loss first in the
perineal and inguinal regions. 403 The hair loss spreads slowly to involve the ventrum and
then the trunk.
Hypogonadism with normal testes can occur in any breed, but Malamutes, Siberian
huskies, Chow Chows, Samoyeds, Pomeranians, and Keeshonds appear to be over-represented. The age of onset is a very important piece of information, but many owners place
it many months later then it actually was. Dogs seem to fall into two categories. In the
first and possibly most common, onset of coat change is between 2 and 4 years of age.
The coat changes in the second group start in late middle age or early old age. The initial
clinical sign is usually change in coat quality and color. The primary hairs on the trunk are
lost slowly while the secondary hairs are retained, giving the dog an overall puppy-like
appearance (see Fig. 1O-28C). The retained secondary hairs lose their luster, become
crimped and fluffy, and take on a woolly appearance. Dark hairs lighten down to their
roots, indicating a change in pigment deposition rather than environmental bleaching (see
Fig. 1O-28D).
Because these coat changes occur slowly over many months, some owners do not
recognize them as abnormalities. They present the dog for hair loss and, when asked
when the problem began, base their answer on hair loss only. Inspection of pictures taken
of the dog months earlier might give a more accurate age at onset. Hair loss is noted on
the collar area, the rump, the perineum, and the caudomedial thighs (see Fig. lO-28E).
Progression of hair loss in these areas and elsewhere is slow. Rarely, dogs that have this
condition for years experience complete truncal alopecia (see Fig. 1O-28F). In some dogs,
hair loss is restricted to the flank region (see Fig. 1O-28G). Hyperpigmentation of the
skin is variable and, when present, is diffuse. The testes are normal on palpation, and no
other physical abnormalities are found.
Diagnosis

With atrophic hypogonadism, hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism must be consid-.
ered and ruled out by appropriate testing. If the dog has palpably normal testes, testicular
neoplasia, adult-onset hyposomatotropism, adrenal sex hormone imbalances, and follicular

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 845

dysplasia are the primary differential diagnostic possibilities. Skin biopsy is diagnostic for
follicular dysplasia but of no help in the differential diagnosis of other conditions. Castration with histopathologic evaluation of the testes is both diagnostic and therapeutic for
hypogonadism and testicular neoplasia. If no response occurs within 4 months of castration, the other differential diagnostic conditions should be investigated.
If the owner is unwilling to use castration as a diagnostic test, thyroid testing and
measurement of serum estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone levels should be performed. These dogs are typically euthyroid, but some dogs have low or high resting TT4
levels. Sex hormones, especially androgens, can interfere with the true measurement of
TT 4 levels by changing the amount or affinity of binding proteins. With hyperandrogenemia or hypoestrogenemia, the baseline TT 4 level can be at or above normal limits. These
changes do not occur in all dogs with hypogonadism and can be caused by other nongonadal disorders that alter thyroid hormone binding.
Although the hair loss in these dogs is due to a sex hormone abnormality, baseline
serum levels of estrogen, testosterone, or progesterone may be normal. In some cases,
hyperestrogenemia, or hyperprogesteronemia can be documented. 373,411 In our experience,
the likelihood of detecting a baseline sex hormone abnormality is influenced by the dog's
breeding, the age at onset of coat changes, and the duration of disease. Because sex
hormones levels vary during the day and the range of normal values is wide, it is difficult
to document a baseline abnormality when the dog has only been affected for a short
period of time. However, chronicity does not guarantee a detectable abnormality, especially when the dog is a Chow Chow, Samoyed, Pomeranian, or Keeshond and its coat
change started within the first 4 years of life. These dogs are likely to have an intercurrent
adrenal sex hormone abnormality (see Adrenal Hyperplasia-cLike Syndrome). Too few
cases have been recognized in the Malamute and Siberian husky to know whether to
include them with the other breeds. Dogs of other breeds, especially when their coat
change started in later life, are likely to have only a gonadal problem that can be
documented by baseline sex hormone measurements. If baseline sex hormone levels are
normal, results of GnRH stimulation tests 400 or ACTH stimulation testing can be useful.
Clinical Management

Correction of the underlying cause of the atrophic hypogonadism usually resolves the hair
loss. If response is incomplete, testosterone supplementation may be necessary. Castration
is curative for most dogs with normal testes, with hair regrowth in 2 to 4 months. If
castration is not allowed, supplementation with testosterone's" or treatment with human
chorionic gonadotropin (50 IV/kg 1M twice weekly for 6 weeks)403 may be of some
benefit. No reports are available on the long-term successful medical management of
these cases.
As mentioned earlier, castration is curative for most dogs with palpably normal testes.
Failures typically occur in the Chow Chow, Samoyed, Pomeranian, and Keeshond breeds.
Some dogs respond completely to castration only to experience relapse within a few
years.F" Again, the four breeds mentioned seem to be over-represented. All dogs who do
not respond to castration or experience relapse within a few years should be evaluated for
adrenal hyperplasia-dike syndrome. There are anecdotal reports that dogs with this condition respond to melatonin supplementation.v" Because hair follicles have no melatonin
receptors, but do have receptors for IGF-l and sex hormones.I- 350 the response probably
is due to local or serum changes of the sex hormones. The latter has been demonstrated
(see Chap. 3).38,5 Because dogs with seasonal flank alopecia'F (see Chap. 11) have normal
serum sex hormone levels 389 but can respond to melatonin,385, 416 a local alteration at the
hair follicle level is probable. Oral treatment with 3 to 6 mg q8-12h should initiate hair
growth within 6 weeks. If no response occurs, testosterone supplementation might be
beneficial.

ADRENAL SEX HORMONE DISORDERS
These dogs have symmetric truncal alopecia, which mimics that seen in hyposomatotropism or the gonadal sex hormone dermatoses, but these patients do not respond to GH
supplementation or neutering. 359, 373, 374

846 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
Dogs with the bilateral adrenal hyperplasia of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism often have abnormal sex hormone levels. Beyond the clitoral hypertrophy that occurs
in some bitches, the sex hormone irregularities do not seem to contribute to the clinical
symptoms of these dogs. Cutaneous changes typical of those occurring with a gonadal sex
hormone imbalance can take place in animals with adrenal neoplasia or adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome.
ADRENAL NEOPLASIA

The vast majority of dogs with a functioning adrenocortical tumor experience the classic
signs of hyperadrenocorticism discussed earlier in this chapter. Although sex hormone
producing adrenal neoplasia has been documented in the cat, it appears to be rare and
the clinical signs are not different from those of the glucocorticoid predominating cases.!"
With rare exception, dogs with sex hormone-producing adrenal tumors also have
elevated cortisol levels, so they experience the classic polyuria and polydipsia of hyperadrenocorticism. However, instead of the gradually progressive truncal hypotrichosis that
occurs in classic hyperadrenocorticism, these dogs have signs of a sex hormone imbalance.
Patterned alopecia, especially of the flank region (Fig. 10-30), and the coat color change
(see Fig. lO-IF) are the most common abnormalities that we have recognized. Circumanal gland hypertrophy or circumanal gland adenoma in a neutered male or female can
also occur. Clitoral hypertrophy can occur in intact or neutered females (see Fig. lO-IG).
Although abnormalities in sex hormone levels can be detected in these dogs, the
diagnosis of adrenal neoplasia is based on the routine cortisol stimulation or suppression
tests and ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal glands. Surgical removal of the involved gland results in resolution of the clinical signs, provided the dog does not have a
metastatic adenocarcinoma.
ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA-LIKE SYNDROME

Cause and Pathogenesis
A study of Pomeranians who were normal or had presumed adult-onset hyposomatotropism noted that an abnormal sex hormone response to ACTH stimulation occurred.I" Both
groups of Pomeranians had higher post-ACTH progesterone levels when compared with
those in normal control animals. Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and androstenedione
levels were also frequently elevated. It was speculated that deficiency of 2I-hydroxylase,
an enzyme involved in adrenal steroidogenesis, was responsible for the abnormal adrenal

FIGURE 10-30. Hyperadrenocorticism secondary to an adrenal tumor.
Symmetric Hank alopecia in a dog
with the constitutional signs of hyperadrenocorticism.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 847
sex hormone production. The investigators who made this discovery in Pomeranians called
the condition congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome because of its similarity to a
condition in humans.F"
Other investigators, including ourselves, tested neutered dogs from other breeds and
found either elevated baseline or post-ACTH stimulation sex hormone levels, especially
of the progesterone compounds.P" ,37.3 Insufficient data are available to determine whether
all dogs with adrenal sex hormone imbalance have enzymatic defects or whether some
dogs produce higher levels of adrenocortical sex steroids than do normal dogs.
The cause of the hair loss in these dogs probably relates to altered sex hormone
binding at the hair follicles. Because elevations in progesterone are common in these dogs
and progesterone can have antiandrogenic activity.U: 418 the hair loss may be attributable
to a local hypoandrogenism. Regrowth of hair in some dogs with testosterone supplementation supports this theory.P" However, because the hair loss in these dogs does not
mimic that of testosterone-responsive dermatoses and not all dogs respond to androgen
supplementation, other mechanisms may be important.
The role of GH in this disorder also is unknown. The GH deficiency may be an
intercurrent endocrinopathy, which contributes to the hair loss via changing the sensitivity
of the hair follicles to sex hormones.i'" or the deficiency could be induced by these
hormone imbalances. l . 2 In a Chow Chow examined by one of us (W.H.M,), the GH
response to xylazine stimulation was abnormaL Castration resulted in regrowth of hair, and
the growth hormone response returned to normaL
Clinical Features

The disorder has been recognized in many breeds, but especially in Pomeranian, Chow
Chow, Keeshond, and Samoyed. Coat changes typically start between 1 and 2 years of
age, but hair loss may not occur until later. Dogs of both sexes can be affected, but male
dogs are over-represented, The hair loss can start before or after neutering. If the hair
loss occurs in an intact dog, regrowth may occur with neutering, but a relapse within 1 to
2 years can be expected.
The dermatologic changes in these dogs mimic those of hyposomatotropism and
gonadal sex hormone imbalance. The first, and often overlooked, clinical sign is the
gradual development of a dull, dry coat with loss of many primary hairs (Fig. 10-31). The
head and distal extremities are spared. Frictional areas of the collar, tail head region, and
caudomedial thighs are more severely involved and are first to become alopecic. Because
the initial coat changes are often subtle, it is difficult to define the time frame to hair loss.
In some dogs, hair loss lags behind the initial coat changes by at least 1 year. As the hair

FIGURE 10-31. Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. Truncal hair
loss and retention of guard hairs in a
3-year-old dog.

848 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-32. Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. A puppy-like
hair coat with hair loss in an adult
dog. The hairless areas hyperpigmented very quickly.

loss in the frictional areas progresses, more primary hairs are lost on the trunk, giving the
remaining coat a puppy-like appearance (Fig. 10-32). The retained secondary hairs are
lost slowly, and all exposed skin tends to become hyperpigmented quickly. Complete
truncal alopecia is rare and occurs only after years of disease. These dogs tend to regrow
tufts of hair at sites damaged by skin biopsy or cutting trauma.
At the onset of the coat changes, these dogs are otherwise healthy. With longstanding disease, most dogs experience noticeable polyuria and polydipsia, but it is nowhere near as marked as that occurring in hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes mellitus.
Some dogs, especially the Samoyeds (a breed with a tendancy toward hyperprogesteronernia) in our case material, experience profound polyuria and polydipsia associated with
insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus.
Diagnosis

The primary differential diagnostic possibilities if there is a persistent patterned alopecia
with retention of the secondary hairs on the trunk include hyposomatotropism, gonadal
sex hormone imbalance, adrenal sex hormone imbalance, and follicular dysplasia. The last
disorder is excluded by skin biopsy.v 16
Skin biopsies from these dogs show the classic changes of endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic surface and follicular hyperkeratosis, follicular dilatation, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, epidermal melanosis, and telogenization of hair follicles) and can also show
some features of follicular dysplasia (dysplastic follicles with a tentacular or octopus-like
appearance and abnormalities in melanization of the hairs, follicular epithelium, and
sebaceous glands) (Fig. 10-33). The dysplastic-type changes can occur in any endocrine
skin disease but tend to be more florid in adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome.
Results of routine laboratory tests are typically normal, as are those of thyroid tests
and the results of low-dose dexamethasone suppression testing. Dogs with diabetes mellitus undergo the biochemical changes of that disorder, and dogs in which estrogen levels
are irregular might show the hematologic changes of estrogen toxicity. In chronic cases,
the baseline and post-ACTH levels of cortisol can be elevated with changes mimicking a
chronic stress pattern. This hypercortisolemia causes the low-level polyuria and polydipsia
these dogs experience and can result in small elevations in serum alkaline phosphatase.
The diagnosis is confirmed by the detection of abnormal concentrations of sex hormones,
especially progesterone and estradiol, as determined by baseline testing373 or in response
to ACTH administration.'?" Baseline testing is least desirable because abnormalities do not
show in all dogs and the testing cannot differentiate the gonadal or adrenal origin if the
dog is intact.
Currently, the only laboratory with well-established normal values for sex steroids

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 849

FIGURE 10-33. Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. An admixture of endocrine (surface and
follicular hyperkeratosis, follicular dilatation, and
telogenization of hair follicles) and dysplastic (dysplastic follicles) changes. Abnormalities in melanization are also present.

before and after' ACTH administration (Table 10-1) is the Endocrinology Laboratory at
the University of Tennessee, College of Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, TN 37901-1071.
We have submitted pre- and post-ACTH samples to our regular endocrinology laboratories for sex hormone evaluation. Because these laboratories do not use the same assay
techniques as the Tennessee laboratory, evaluate the same hormones, or have post-ACTH
values that are as well established, the results developed therein are not directly comparable with those from Tennessee. However, the pattern of change in the Tennessee data
(e.g., elevated progesterone baseline value that more than triples after ACTH administration) can be duplicated.
Clinical Management

In intact dogs, especially male dogs, neutering is the initial treatment of choice because
many dogs experience hair regrowth for some period of time after surgery. If the hair loss
initially occurred after neutering, recurred after regrowth following surgery, or did not
improve after surgery, treatment options include methyltestosterone, GH, melatonin, o,p'DDD, or observation. Bilateral adrenalectomy should be effective, but is unproven. Because GH is not readily available, the options are reduced. Treatments with melatonin or
methyltestosterone may be beneficial in regrowing hair""9, 416 but do not alter the abnormal adrenal steroid production. These animals, like those who remain untreated, should
be monitored for signs of bone marrow suppression or diabetes mellitus. Current recommendations for o,p'-DDD use indicate that the drug be given at daily doses of 15 to
25 mg/kg. 374 Response is determined by ACTH response testing for plasma cortisol at
weekly intervals.

850 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
• Tahle 10-1

MEAN (±SD) SEX HORMONE LEVELS'" IN
NORMAL DOGS BEFORE AND AFTER
ACTH STIMULATION
INTACT (n = 10)

NEUTERED (n = 9)

MALES

Baseline

Post-ACTH

Baseline

Post-ACTH

Progesterone
17-hydroxyprogesterone
DHEAS
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estradiol 17 {3

0.4 (:to.5)
0.3 (::!:0.4)
18.5 (::!: 11.5)
1.3.3 (::!:lO.l)
3.1 (::!:4.2)
18.7 (::!: 14.6)

1.1 (::!: 1.2)
1.4 (::!:0.9)
20.8 (::!: 11.0)
12.2 (::!:6.7)
2.6 (::!:4.1)
15.6 (::!:8.6)

0.1 (::!:O.O)
0.1 (::!:O.O)
2.1 (::!:3.3)

0.4 (::!:0.4)
0.6 (::!:0.3)
2.9 (::!:4.3)

INTACT (n = 5)

4B(::!:lE)

~4(::!:2n)

0.0 (::!: 0.0)
43.1 (::!:lO.O)

0.0 (::!: 0.0)
41.3 (::!:13.5)

NEUTERED (n = 8)

FEMALES

Baseline

Post-ACTH

Baseline

Post-ACTH

Progesterone
17-hydroxyprogesterone
DHEAS
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Estradiol 17 {3

0.3 (::!:0.1)
0.2 (::!:O.l)
5.7 (::!:1.7)
6.5 (::!:8.0)
0.1 (::!:0.0)
24.8 (::!:9.4)

0.8 (::!:0.3)
1.5 (::!:0.4)
7.8 (::!: 1.68)
2.0 (::!:0.9)
0.1 (::!:O.O)
22.0 (::!:8.1)

0.1 (::!:0.1)
0.1 (::!:O.l)
3.8 (::!:4.5)
6.5 (::!:3.7)
0.0 (::!:O.O)
40.3 (::!:8.2)

0.7 (::!:0.7)
0.9 (::!:0.3)
5.0 (::!:4.7)
4.9 (::!:0.4)
0.0 (::!:O.O)
40.6 (::!:8.l)

•All levels are in ng/ml except estradiol 17 {3 levels, which are in pg/ml.
Modified with permission from Schmeitzel LP, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. In: Bonagura JO (ed):
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XlI. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995, p 600.

The goal of therapy is to reduce the baseline cortisol concentration to a low-normal
range with some response to ACTH. One investigator suggested poststimulation values of
3 to 5 JLg/dl,374 whereas another investigator recommended 5 to 7 JLg/dl,368,373 After the
desired adrenal suppression has been achieved, drug administration is changed to weekly
and then adjusted as needed to maintain the suppression. This treatment resulted in
complete hair regrowth in 10 of 12 cases. 369
Because these dogs are healthy and the o,p'-DDD treatment is expensive and not
without risk, some owners elect not to treat their dog. If the dog's progesterone or
estrogen metabolism is irregular, periodic laboratory evaluations for progesterone-induced
diabetes mellitus or estrogen-induced bone marrow suppression is indicated. At the first
sign of an abnormality, treatment must be instituted to prevent serious metabolic consequences, The untreated dog's hair loss progresses very slowly and eventually involves the
majority of the trunk (Fig. 10-34). These dogs are at increased risk for frostbite, sunburn,

FIGURE 10-34. Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome. A 13-year-old
Bouvier de Flanders with untreated
disease for over 7 years. Note the
islands of hair on the almost hairless
trunk.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 85 I
or other environmental insults, and their management must be adjusted accordingly. As
mentioned earlier, they will experience polyuria and polydipsia that worsens slowly. At
some point, the polyuria and polydipsia can become so severe that the dog loses its house
training. Because the hair follicles in these dogs are still viable despite years of inactivity,
late treatment results in coat regrowth and the elimination of the cortisol-induced polyuria
and polydipsia.

RARE SEX HORMONE DERMATOSES
Early editions of this and other dermatology texts associated feline endocrine alopecia and
idiopathic male feminizing syndrome with sex hormones.!' The feline condition is discussed in Chapter 11 because it has no endocrine basis in the vast majority of cases.
Occasionally, cats respond to estrogen or testosterone supplementation, but because of the
hepatic sensitivity of cats to sex hormones and the rarity of the condition, all other causes
of hair loss should be investigated first.
Dogs with idiopathic male feminizing syndrome experience hair loss of the rump, the
perineum, and the ventral abdomen, which can progress to involve the entire ventrum,
the neck, and the face.'! The exposed skin is hyperpigmented and seborrheic. Moderate
to severe pruritus, ceruminous otitis, and nipple enlargement are consistent findings. The
testes and sex hormone levels in these dogs are normal. Skin biopsy reveals no evidence
of endocrinopathy; instead, it reveals changes most consistent with hypersensttivity."
Careful review of cases of presumed idiopathic male feminizing syndrome shows that
pruritus precedes the skin lesions. In early cases, only the inguinal nipples are involved,
which refutes an endocrine cause. Trauma during itching is the likely cause of the nipple
hypertrophy. Most dogs with idiopathic male feminizing syndrome have hypersensitivity,
with food hypersensitivity and hormonal hypersensitivity most likely. Resolution of signs
with castration supports the latter diagnosis.
If the hair loss, hyperpigmentation, and seborrhea precede any pruritus and the
nipple enlargement is uniform throughout all glands, endocrine disease must be considered. Hypothyroidism and estrogen-producing testicular neoplasia are the primary differential diagnostic considerations.

Canine Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is the most common endocrine disorder of the dog and is characterized
by a plethora of cutaneous and noncutaneous clinical signs associated with a deficiency
of thyroid hormone activity." It is also the most commonly overdiagnosed endocrine
disease.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Canine hypothyroidism may be naturally occurring or iatrogenic. 1, 2, 101 Naturally occurring,
acquired primary hypothyroidism accounts for more than 90% of all cases of canine
hypothyroidism. The two main causes of acquired primary hypothyroidism are lymphocytic
thyroiditis and idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy.
Lymphocytic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis is a common cause of hypothyroidism in dogs. t
Lymphocytic thyroiditis has long been recognized as a familial disorder of colony-raised
Beagles with polygenic inheritance.P" In one closed colony, approximately 10% of dogs
were affected.P" Dogs with thyroiditis are at increased risk for thyroid tumors, but it is
unclear whether the neoplasia is triggered by the thyroiditis or some other genetic
influence.P Lymphocytic thyroiditis is thought to be an autoimmune disorder in which
humoral and cell-mediated autoimmunity are involved in the pathogenesis.
Antibodies to thyroglobulin, T 3 , T 4 , or combinations thereof can be detected.P" Anti-

"See references 1, 2, 14, 20, 48, 68, 101, Ill, 137.
'See references 22, 34, 52, 55, 62-64, 79.

852 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
thyroglobulin antibodies are demonstrable in the sera of more than 50% of dogs with
naturally occurring hypothyroidism, and Great Danes, Irish setters, Borzois, Old English
sheepdogs, and Doberman pinschers appear to be predisposed.P 36, 55 However, antithyroglobulin antibodies can be found in normal dogs or those with nonthyroidal endocrine
diseases.f" 71, 98 Antibodies have been detected in approximately 50% of clinically normal
dogs related to dogs with hypothyroidism and in approximately 15% of randomly studied
normal dogs, The prevalence of antithyroglobulin antibodies also was increased in dogs
with various dermatoses." Anti-T, antibodies and, rarely, anti-T, antibodies can also be
detected in the serum of dogs with thyroiditis ,34, 52. 79, 130 Invariably, dogs with anti-T,
antibodies have antithyroglobulin antibodies, but the reverse is not true. 52 These autoantibodies interfere with thyroid assays and lead to spurious results that suggest hyperthyroidism. 61 Twenty percent of the dogs with naturally occurring hypothyroidism also have
circulating immune complexes.
Lymphocytic thyroiditis has been produced in normal dogs by injections of thyroglobulin or thyroid antigens with adjuvants, intrathyroid injections of antithyroglobulin antibodies, and intrathyroid injections of allogenic lymphocytes.P: 64 Thyroid lesions in dogs with
naturally occurring lymphocytic thyroiditis are characterized by multifocal to diffuse interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages associated with destruction of thyroid follicles, as well as by the presence of electron-dense deposits in the
follicular basement membrane that resemble antigen-antibody complexes. The frequency
and severity of laboratory abnormalities vary with the extent of involvement. Dogs with
mild pathologic changes in the thyroid glands often have normal thyroid profiles/" Because lymphocytic thyroiditis is a focal disease and because inflammation is minimal in the
late stages, it has been suggested that so-called idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy
may be an end stage of lymphocytic thyroiditis,
Naturally occurring secondary hypothyroidism accounts for less than 10% of all canine
hypothyroidism and has been reported in association with pituitary dwarfism and pituitary
neoplasia. 1, 2, 11 Other causes of canine hypothyroidism are rare.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Goitrous and nongoitrous congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in the Boxer, Bull
mastiff, German shepherd, Scottish deerhound, and Giant schnauzer breeds.P- 35, 50, 87, 92, 135
Mongrels can also be affected."
Acquired hypothyroidism may affect any breed of dog. At Cornell University, breeds
at risk for hypothyroidism, in decreasing order of relative risk, are the Chinese Shar pei,
Chow Chow, Great Dane, Irish wolfhound, Boxer, English bulldog, Dachshund, Afghan
hound, Newfoundland, Malamute, Doberman pinscher, Brittany spaniel, Poodle, Golden
retriever, and Miniature schnauzer.'! Other studies include the Airedale terrier, Cocker
spaniel, Irish setter, Shetland sheepdog, Old English sheepdog, and Pomerantan.w 101
Antithyroglobulin antibodies are found more often in Great Danes, Borzois, Irish setters,
Old English sheepdogs, and Doberman pfnschers.P 48 German shepherd dogs and mongrels are thought to be at lower risk. 1 J Familial hypothyroidism has been suspected in
Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, and German shorthaired pointers.
There is no sex predilection for canine hypothyroidism, but neutered male and female
dogs may be at higher risk than intact dogs. 48 , 106 Although a dog of any age may be
affected, the risk is greater for dogs between the ages of 6 and 10 years. The onset of
hypothyroidism tends to be earlier (2 to 3 years old) in large and giant breeds and those
breeds predisposed to the disorder,
The clinical signs associated with hypothyroidism are many and varied and involve
multiple organ systems." At presentation, the dog can have systemic illness with normal
skin, dermatologic disease plus systemic signs of illness, or dermatologic disease only. In
the latter case, the systemic signs may be unrecognized, may be attributed to the dog's

"See references 14, 20, 48, 68, 99, 101, Ill, 113, 137,

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 853

aging, or may not exist. If there are no systemic signs, the cutaneous lesions may be due
to hair follicle receptor insensitivity or local deiodination problems.P" With this variability,
hypothyroidism has rightfully been labeled "the great impersonator."
Although lethargy, mental depression, obesity, hypothermia, and thermophilia are
classic manifestations of hypothyroidism.f" many hypothyroid dogs appear active and alert,
are well fleshed or thin, and do not exhibit heat-seeking behavior.l?" In general, if a dog is
obviously obese, it is probably not hypothyroid. The rectal temperature of most hypothyroid dogs is in the normal range.
The classic cutaneous signs of canine hypothyroidism include (1) bilaterally symmetric
truncal alopecia, which tends to spare the extremities (Fig. 1O-35B); (2) a dull, dry,
brittle, easily epilated haircoat that fails to regrow after clipping (see Fig. 1O-35C);
(3) thick, puffy, nonpitting skin (myxedema) that is cool to the touch (see Figs. 1O-35D
and 10-36); (4) variable hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 1O-35B); (5) seborrhea (see Fig.
1O-35C); (6) susceptibility to skin infections (Fig. 10-37); and (7) lack of pruritus.
However, the clinical variations from this classic picture are enormous and frequent.
Because receptors for thyroid hormones are found on sebocytes and cells of the outer
root sheath and dermal papilla." coat abnormalities can be expected in most, if not all,
hypothyroid dogs. Growing hairs are decreased in diameter, and telogen hairs are maintained because initiation of anagen is prevented." Although some laboratory dogs don't
lose hair, hair loss is common in household dogs. Initially, the coat loses its normal sheen
and luster and becomes dull, dry, and brittle. Shedding becomes more pronounced during
nonshed periods, and the lost hairs either regrow more slowly than normally or are not
replaced.
Noticeable hypotrichosis or alopecia occurs first in frictional' .areas, especially over
pressure points, the ventrum, the perineum, and the tail (see Fig. 10-35E). Large and
giant breeds often lose hair first on the lateral surface of the extremities (see Fig.
1O-35F). With time, the hair loss becomes more widespread (see Fig.-1O-35G) and
involves the entire trunk in a symmetric distribution (see Fig. 1O-35B). In advanced
cases, all hairs except those on the head and distal extremities are lost. Most cases are
presented earlier in the course of the disease and may have hypotrichosis or alopecia,
which may be focal, multifocal, symmetric, or asymmetric (Figs. 10-38 to 10-40; see ·Fig.
10-35H). In some dogs, hair loss is restricted to the flank region (Fig. 10-41). An
unusual finding is hypertrichosis in which, because of the retarded turnover of the hairs,
the coat becomes thick and resembles a carpet (Fig. 10-42). Hypertrichosis occurs most
commonly in Boxers and Irish setters. The coat can become lighter in color, especially at
the tips of the hairs, because the retained hairs are more susceptible to environmental
bleaching. This coat color change can occur in nonhypertrichotic hypothyroid dogs but is
more common in dogs with sex hormone imbalances.
Because thyroid hormones influence serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations 32, 136.145 and influence sebaceous gland function.l" seborrheic changes are-common in
hypothyroid dogs. The altered lipid profile can result in dryness, greasiness, or seborrheic
dermatitis. These changes usually occur in the ears (ceruminous otitis) (Fig. 1O-43A), on
the body (see Fig. 1O-35C), or in both locations. On the body, the seborrheic changes
can be focal, multifocal, or generalized. The seborrheic changes predispose the animal to
secondary staphylococcal or Malassezia infections, which intensify the seborrheic signs.
Bacterial pyoderma occurs frequently in hypothyroid dogs. ll . 20 The bacterial pyoderma may be localized (e.g., pododermatitis or otitis externa), multifocal, or generalized
and may be superficial (folliculitis) (see Fig. 10-37) or deep (furunculosis) (see Fig.
1O-43B and C). The pathogenic mechanism of this increased susceptibility to bacterial
pyoderma probably relates to an altered cutaneous barrier, immunologic hyporeactivity, or
a combination of both. In various laboratory animals, it has been reported that depletion
of thyroid hormone results in impaired B-lymphocyte and T-lymphocyte functions.'! Because hypothyroid dogs do not appear to be at risk for noncutaneous infections, the skin
infections in most dogs are probably due to a skin defect or alteration in local cutaneous
immunity.U" Rarely, a dog with bacterial pyoderma due to hypothyroidism has depressed
neutrophil or T-lymphocyte function as assessed by bactericidal assay or in vitro lympho-

FIGURE 10-35. A, Adrenal sex hormone imbalance. Note similarities to Figures 1O-9E and 1O-28F.
B, Hypothyroidism. Note symmetric truncal alopecia and hyperpigmentation. C, Hypothyroidism. Dull, dry,
seborrheic coat. D, Hypothyroidism. Facial myxedema leading to a "tragic" expression. E, Hypothyroidism. "Rat
tail." F, Hypothyroidism. Frictional hair loss of the distal limbs of a St. Bernard. G, Hypothyroidism. Truncal
hypotrichosis and alopecia with secondary superficial folliculitis. H, Hypothyroidism. Nasal alopecia and hyperpigmentation. The area is cool to the touch.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 855

FIGURE 10-36. Hypothyroidism. Generalized myxedema in a
mongrel dog.

cyte blastogenesis to phytomitogens, respectively.'! The immunologic abnormalities return
to normal with T 4 therapy. However, antibiotics are necessary to resolve the current
infection, whereas T 4 therapy prevents further relapses. Some hypothyroid dogs experience a secondary Malassezia dermatitis in intertriginous areas or, less commonly, in a
generalized distribution, or they have Malassezia otitis extema.P' Some cases of adult-onset
generalized demodicosis have been associated with hypothyroidism.P'
When seborrhea, bacterial pyoderma, or Malassezia dermatitis are attributable to
canine hypothyroidism, pruritus may be considerable. Poor wound healing is probably
referable to defects in fibroblast function and collagen metabolism. Altered healing can be
manifested by delayed healing of traumatic or surgical wounds or by the development of
excessive fibrous tissue at points of minimal trauma. In the latter case, excessive scarring
can occur in areas of deep follicular infection, or the dog can have excessive calluses at
common pressure points and other less commonly affected areas such as the tuber
ischium. 11, III Easy bruising may be associated with the collagen metabolism defects
mentioned previously or with thrombasthenia and clotting factor defects that respond to
thyroid hormone therapy.s" 48,101

FIGURE 10-37. Hypothyroidism.
Truncal alopecia with a secondary
superficial folliculitis.

856 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-38. Hypothyroidism.
Facial hair loss and scaling.

Other cutaneous signs commonly associated with hypothyroidism include hyperpigmentation, lichenification, comedones, and mucin accumulation.l" 20. 137 The hyperpigmentation and lichenification are not specific for hypothyroidism, but reflect its chronicity.
Although comedones can be numerous on the ventral abdomen of hypothyroid dogs, they
usually accompany seborrheic changes on the trunk. In the absence of other seborrheic
changes, numerous comedones are more frequently associated with hyperadrenocorticism
or sex hormone dermatoses. Because thyroid hormones help to regulate the production of
dermal glycosaminoglycans, hypothyroid dogs can accumulate hyaluronic acid in the dermis. 41• 46 This accumulation of mucin can lead to myxedema, in which the skin is thick,
puffy (Fig. 10-36), and cool to the touch, or rarely mucinous vesiculation (see Fig. 1043D).20 The myxedematous changes are usually most pronounced on the face, where the
skin of the forehead, eyelids, and lips droops, producing a tragic facial expression (see Fig.
1O-35D).
The veterinary literature includes large lists of noncutaneous abnormalities associated
with hypothyroidism, Aside from mental dullness, central nervous system signs are rare

FIGURE 10-39. Hypothyroidism. Hair loss on the head and ears.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 857

FIGURE 10-40. Hypothyroidism.
Hair loss over the caudal dorsum.

in primary hypothyroidism and can be caused by atherosclerotic or myxedematous
changes.77, 85. Ill, 113, 119, 163 The atherosclerotic changes are secondary to hyperlipidemia and
can also affect the vessels in the heart, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract. 113. 166 Signs can
include seizures, disorientation, circling, and coma. Myxedematous coma is of most concern because death can occur rapidly." 35, 67a Most cases have been reported in Doberman
pinschers, and precoma signs include severe mental depression, hypoventilation, bradycardia, and hypothermia. Progression to coma can occur spontaneously or be precipitated by
various drugs, disease, or anesthesia.
Neuromuscular disorders can occur with or without cutaneous signs. Cranial nerve
abnormalities (head tilt, ataxia, facial palsy, and laryngeal paralysis), megaesophagus, unilateral lameness, paraparesis, tetraparesis, and myopathy with weakness and atrophy have all
been associated with hypothyroidisrn.F" .31, 48. !O1 Depending on the cause and chronicity of
the problem, these changes mayor may not be reversible with treatment.

FIGURE 10-41. Hypothyroidism. Symmetric flank alopecia and
hyperpigmentation.

858 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-42. Hypertrichosis
in an Irish setter with hypothyroidism.

The most common gastrointestinal sign of hypothyroidism in humans, but not in dogs,
is constipation. In dogs, the most common gastrointestinal signs of hypothyroidism are
diarrhea, vomiting, or both.l- 48 These are occasional, Cardiovascular complications of
hypothyroidism in dogs include bradycardia, weak apex beat, atherosclerosis, thrombosis,
and cardiac arrhythmias associated with cardiomyopathy.1, 2, 99, 101
Ocular abnormalities that may be associated with canine hypothyroidism include corneal lipidosis, corneal ulceration, lipid aqueous flair, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, uveitis, and
retinopathy, 1. 2, 48. 101. 113
Hypothyroid dogs can have mild nonregenerative anemia or an increased bleeding
tendency due to platelet dysfunction'P" or clotting factor defects (see Fig. 1O-43E),
Because T 4 amplifies production of factor VIII and factor VIII-related antigen, hypothyroidism could worsen the coagulation profile in a dog with von Willebrand's disease. 35• 48, 101
The theory that hypothyroidism induces acquired von Willebrand's syndrome has largely
been discounted.l'" 109
Classic reproductive changes associated with hypothyroidism include infertility, altered
or absent estrous cycles, abortion, high puppy mortality, decreased spermatogenesis, and
testicular atrophy.v 21 Gynecomastia and inappropriate galactorrhea can occur in up to
25% of intact, anestrous bitches and rarely in neutered female and male animals (Fig.
10_44).1,2.11,76 In these cases, the mammary changes are thought to be due to hyperprolactinemia induced by elevated levels of TRH.37
Renal lesions have been recognized in humans' and laboratory animals with hypothyroidism.'! Renal lesions and renal failure have also been recognized in association with
canine hypothyroidism, especially in dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis.
Hypothyroidism can exist Singularly, occur intercurrently with another endocrine disease (e.g., diabetes mellitus),50 be secondary to another endocrine disease (e.g., hyperadrenocorticisml.P? or be part of a polyglandular problem.v- 113 In the latter case, diabetes
mellitus, hypoadrenocorticism, and thyroiditis occur simultaneously and are thought to
result from an autoimmune process. Typically, the signs of the hypoadrenocorticism predominate. Because hypoadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus are causes of thyroid profile
irregularities in euthyroid dogs, thyroid testing should be postponed in these dogs until
the other conditions are regulated. Satisfactory control of one problem (e.g., diabetes
mellitus) often necessitates correction of the other intercurrent conditions."
Congenital hypothyroidism has been reported in both purebred and mongrel
dogs. 33. 35. 60. 67, 92.135 It may be goitrous or nongoitrous. During the first month of life, the
puppies are fairly normal, but abnormalities are recognized quickly thereafter. The dogs

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 859

FIGURE 10-43. A, Severely hypothyroid black cocker spaniel, showing severe chronic otitis. B, Hypothyroidism.
Interdigital furunculosis is the only sign of disease. C, Hypothyroidism. Symmetric areas of furunculosis mimicking
acral lick dermatitis. D, Hypothyroidism. Mucinous vesiculation. E, Hypothyroidism. Bruising secondary to trauma.
F, Hypothyroidism. Photomicrograph showing vacuolated arrector pili muscle. G, Hypothyroidism. Photomicrograph
showing myxedema. H, Traumatic dorsal hair loss and scaling in a hyperthyroid cat.

860 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-44. Hypothyroidism. Gynecomastia in a neutered female.

are somnolent, mentally retarded, disproportionately dwarfed, and lame. Other signs also
are possible. Hair loss is not evident, but the coat is often different from that of the
normallittermates. Early treatment is needed to prevent irreversible changes.
DIAGNOSIS

Because of the plethora of clinical signs in canine hypothyroidism, the differential diagnosis is exhaustive, as would be expected from a disease with such variable signS.1l4 Definitive diagnosis necessitates thyroid biopsy but, because such testing is impractical, most
clinicians rely on the history, physical examination findings, hematology, serum chemistry
determinations, urinalysis, skin biopsy, and thyroid function tests. None of these tests is
specific for primary hypothyroidism, and all have some margin of error. Because no one
test is diagnostic, it is important to evaluate all test results in light of the patient's history
and physical examination results.
The hemogram classically reveals a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia (packed cell volume, 25% to 36%).1.2· 101 However, this is found in only approximately
30% of cases.l'" In addition, macrocytic and microcytic-hypochromic anemias may occur in
canine hypothyroidism, possibly reflecting defects in vitamin B12 and folic acid metabolism
or iron metabolism, respectively. Leptocytosis may be prominent in the anemic hypothyroid dog.
Another classic laboratory finding in hypothyroidism is hypercholesterolemia (260 to
1000 mg/dl).! 2. 450. 101 However, serum cholesterol levels are greatly influenced by diet,
can be elevated in other non thyroid disorders, and are Significantly elevated after a 24hour fast in only about 50% to 75% of cases. Serum cholesterol levels tend to be elevated
with severe degrees of thyroid failure. Analysis of serum lipids in lipemic hypothyroid dogs
may reveal hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and intense electrophoretic bands
at the origin, Bclipoprotein, and u2-lipoprotein positlons.P 136. 145
Serum creatine kinase activity is mildly to markedly elevated in less than 50% of dogs
with hypothyroidism with or without concurrent clinical myopathy. 101. 106 Other serum
enzyme levels that may be mildly to markedly elevated in hypothyroidism include lactate
dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, and alkaline phosphatase
levels. These elevations presumably result from the aforementioned hypothyroid myopathy
and from the degenerative hepatopathies (fatty infiltration and cirrhosis) that may accompany canine hypothyroidism.
Urinalysis results usually are normal in canine hypothyroidism. A few dogs with
lymphocytic thyroiditis have had proteinuria and immune complex glomerulonephritis.
Electrocardiographic examination of hypothyroid dogs may reveal bradycardia, low
voltage in all leads, flat T waves, and arrhythmias.1. 2. 101 Radiographic examination of
animals with congenital hypothyroidism reveals epiphyseal dysgenesis. 1. 2

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 861

Skin biopsy in canine hypothyroidism may reveal many nondiagnostic changes consistent with endocrinopathy (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal atrophy, epidermal melanosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilatation, follicular atrophy, telogenization of hair
follicles, excessive trichilemmal keratinization, and sebaceous gland atrophy)." 16, 137 Histopathologic findings highly suggestive of hypothyroidism include vacuolated, hypertrophied
arrector pili muscles (see Fig. 1O-43F), increased dermal mucin (mucinosis or myxedema)
(see Fig. 1O-43G), and a thick dermis. About 50% of the biopsy specimens from hypothyroid dog skin reveal variable degrees of inflammation, reflecting the common occurrence
of secondary seborrhea, bacterial pyoderma, or both.
Thyroid Testing

Except for thyroid biopsy, no one thyroid test is diagnostic for primary hypothyroidism,u, 68
Because peripheral hormone levels depend on thyroid production, protein binding, and
rate of metabolism, basal measurements can be subject to a wide margin of error.
Function studies (TSH or TRH stimulation tests) test the thyroid's secretory capacity and
are most diagnostic but are not commonly used because of the expense and difficulty in
obtaining TSH or TRH. All test results, including stimulation tests, must be evaluated
critically, and if the results do not correlate well with the history and physical examination
findings, the test should be repeated."
Because stimulation tests are not available, basal measurements of TT 4 , fT 4 , TT 3 ,
fT3 , and cTSH are the mainstay of testing. Because measurement of TT 3 and fI', has
limited value in the diagnosis of hypothyroidism, these hormones will be eliminated from
the discussion.F" 78, 102 In the literature prior to 1995, most studies defined a normal range
of values for TT 4 or fT 4 and evaluated their results based on this range. 23, 78, 100, 102, 118
Dogs with values in or above the normal range were considered euthyroid, whereas those
with values below the lower limit of normal were not. These studies also reported their
data as raw numbers of dogs that were or were not considered euthyroid or hypothyroid
under the conditions of study. Both of these shortcomings caused some inaccuracy in the
data.
Thyroid testing started to become popular in the late 1970s. In that era, statistical
methods rarely were used in clinical studies, so the range of normal presented for the
various thyroid tests was exactly that. The lower limit of normal was the lowest value
recorded in the population of normal dogs tested. In most cases, the number of dogs used
to develop the normal range was not available or was small. Today, we know that large
numbers of observations are needed to statistically discriminate between two very similar
conditions and that means values ± 1 or 2 standard deviations are a more accurate way of
presenting the normal range of the data. Additionally, we know that raw data presentation
does not account for random fluctuations in the population and that calculation of the
test's sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value is more
informative and accurate.
If one accepts the range of normal values for TT 4 , fT 4 , or cTSH at their face value
and defines a hypothyroid dog as one with a TT 4 or fT 4 below normal or a cTSH above
normal, Significant error is introduced. For example, when 51 euthyroid dogs were evaluated and the diagnosis of hypothyroidism was based on a subnormal TT 4 or fT 4 level, 20%
of the dogs would have been called hypothyroid.U" In that same study, 8% of the 24
hypothyroid dogs were called normal. In another study of 49 euthyroid dogs with skin
disease and 9 hypothyroid dogs, low IT4 or fT 4 levels were defined as a value less than
the mean minus 2 standard deviations." With these stricter criteria, none of the euthyroid
dogs was considered hypothyroid. Three of the 9 hypothyroid dogs had a low IT4 and 9
had a low fT 4 level. In all 9 of the hypothyroid dogs, diagnosis was correct if the
definition of hypothyroidism was based on a low TT 4 or fT 4 level.
These and other studies indicate that we should request two or more thyroid tests for
each patient and that we must be critical in our evaluation of these tests. Values just
below normal are of unknown significance, and the accuracy of diagnosis increases as the
definition of hypothyroidism becomes more stringent. Data in the gray zone (e.g., mean
value minus 1 standard deviation) are not interpretable by themselves, and tests must be

862 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

performed again at a later date or be evaluated with another thyroid hormone. If stimulation tests become available again, data in the gray zone should be evaluated by that
testing.
To overcome shortcomings in sample size and account for random fluctuations in the
population, most current papers present the sensitivity and specificity data of the test in
question. Tests with a high sensitivity (e.g., 98%) but a low specificity (e.g., 75%) are of
questionable value in discriminating between normal and disease states because abnormal
values can be found in a significant percentage, in this case 25%, of normal individuals.
Published sensitivity figures for TT 4 levels vary from 89% to 100%; the specificity varies
from 75% to 82%.43,124 Figures for the sensitivity and specificity of fT 4 range from 80% to
98% and 92% to 94%, respectively.P 89, 124 Lastly, the sensitivity and specificity data for
cTSH range from 63% to 87% and 75% to 93%, respectively.w 43. S9. 124, 144 Obviously, no
one test is perfect, but a fT 4 level by dialysis has the highest degree of accuracy for any
single test. Simultaneous evaluation of two or more tests (e.g., a thyroid panel) can
markedly increase the specificity of the testing. 89, 144 This panel approach is necessary in
epileptic dogs or those taking other medications that can influence hormone Ievels.P" 53
Because immune-mediated thyroiditis is a common cause of hypothyroidism, measurement of serum antithyroglobulin, anti-Tj, or anti-T, antibodies can be useful in documenting thyroiditis. In an evaluation of over 100,000 serum samples submitted for thyroid
profiles, approximately 6% had autoantibodies.P? Approximately 5% had antibodies to T 3,
0.3% had antibodies to T 4, and 0.9% had both T 3 and T 4 autoantibodies. Approximately
25% to 35% of euthyroid dogs have elevated levels, and approximately 50% of hypothyroid dogs have normal levels; thus, this testing cannot be used to document hypothyroidism." Additionally, these autoantibodies can interfere with the accurate measurement of
TT3 or TT 4.80 Although the dog has the clinical signs of hypothyroidism, its TT 3 or TT4 is
spuriously elevated into the hyperthyroid range. The fT 4 level in these dogs may be valid.
Function Studies

The TSH stimulation test is vastly superior to the determination of basal serum TT 4, fT4,
or cTSH levels for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Unfortunately, the TSH of bovine
origin that was used in this testing is not available in many parts of the world. Recombinant human TSH stimulates the dog's thyroid gland when given intravenously at doses of
50 f.Lg or greater. 141 However, this product is extremely expensive, which precludes
its regular use. If bovine TSH is available, samples are collected before and 4 or
6 hours after the subcutaneous or intravenous administration of 0.1 IU/kg or 1 IU/
dog. 27,7S, 102, 116, ns Because reconstituted TSH maintains its potency when frozen in the
standard freezer (-20°C [- 4°C]) for over 6 months.s" 81, 116 large vials should be subdivided and frozen so the largest number of animals can be tested.
Traditionally, euthyroidism was diagnosed when the post-TSH TT 4 value was at least
double the basal level. With this system, approximately 30% of euthyroid dogs can be
called hypothyroid and approximately 50% of hypothyroid dogs are called normal.!" It is
more appropriate to base normalcy on either a rise in the post-TSH TT 4 to some
predetermined value or an increase of at least some predetermined amount. Specific
values for the end point of normalcy or the rise expected in normal dogs vary with the
laboratory and the amount of TSH used. When one investigator used the 1.4 f.Lg/dl rise
suggested in another study82 rather than the 1.9 f.Lg/dl figure suggested by the testing
laboratory, diagnosis was incorrect in 4 of 75 dogs.ll s Accordingly, test results must always
be interpreted in light of the normal values developed by the testing laboratory.
A TSH (or TRH) stimulation test performed on a dog that is receiving thyroid
hormone therapy will give spurious results. Because exogenous T 4 suppresses thyroid
function.l'" the drug must be withdrawn for accurate testing. Most dogs can be accurately
tested after a 30-day withdrawal period, but approximately 20% of dogs are still under the
influence of the drug. 104 An 8-week withdrawal is satisfactory in all dogs.
The TRH stimulation test was developed as a less expensive and consistently available
alternative to the TSH stimulation test. 84 Unfortunately, the test has not lived up to its
expectation and is of little diagnostic value.P' Serum TT 4 levels are determined before and

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 863

6 hours after the IV injection of 0.2 or 0.05 mg/kg (maximum, 1 mg)51, 165 of TRH. The
post-TRH TT 4 level in normal dogs should increase by 0.4 JLg/dl or more or be at least
112 times greater than the basal value. 1, 2, 84, 102 Although TRH testing in normal dogs
gives good results, its accuracy in hypothyroid dogs often is not satisfactory."
The diagnosis of hypothyroidism, as well as the distinction between primary and
secondary hypothyroidism, can be based on thyroid biopsy." Radioiodine uptake studies
and other special radiographic techniques are also valuable but are not routinely available.
Although the response to thyroid hormone therapy is often listed as a diagnostic test
of hypothyroidism, it can be unreliable. The metabolic effects of thyroid hormones may
produce varying degrees of improvement in symptoms such as lethargy, depression, and
obesity, regardless of their cause. In addition, thyroid hormone administration may produce varying degrees of hair growth in normal dogs and hair regrowth in dogs with
numerous dermatoses that are unrelated to hypothyroidism." However, the institution of
treatment with prompt therapeutic monitoring of TT 4 levels might be of some diagnostic
significance. When a hypothyroid dog is given 0.02 mg/kg of oral levothyroxine, its serum
concentration of TT4 should peak in 4 to 6 hours and be at or slightly above the upper
limit of normal. In our experience, the post-pill TT 4 level of a euthyroid dog given the
therapeutic dose of levothyroxine for a month will be Significantly above normal. This
markedly elevated post-pill TT 4 level does not guarantee the euthyroid state but should
prompt the clinician to carefully evaluate the case before continuing the treatment.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
After treatment of primary hypothyroidism has been started, it is continued for the
remainder of the patient's life.
In most cases, oral levothyroxine (T4) is the drug of choice for hypothyroidism.
Various treatment regimens can be found in the veterinary literature, but most suggest
either once- or twice-daily administration of 0.02 mg/kg to a maximum daily dosage of
0.8 mg qI2h. 49, 58, 59, 102, 112 Because supplementation is lifelong and owner compliance
decreases when multiple treatments are needed each day, it is ideal to administer the T 4
once daily. When 12 thyroidectomized dogs were treated with 0.04, 0.02, or 0.01 mg/kg
of levothyroxine either once or divided twice daily, variability in drug absorption and
elimination was noted among the dogs."? Twice-daily administration resulted in drug
concentrations closer to the physiologic range. However, most dogs respond favorably to
the more convenient once-daily administration.w 58, 59, 112 and some dogs treated twice
daily show signs of toxicity. Because of the rapid metabolic turnover rate of T 4 (10 to 16
hours in dogs, 7 days in humans), incomplete absorption from the gut, and marked fecal
excretion, signs of overdosing are very uncommon at the typical therapeutic dosages and
include anxiety, panting, polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, diarrhea, tachycardia, heat intolerance, pruritus, and pyrexia. These signs of hyperthyroidism disappear quickly when the
dosage is modified appropriately.
Ultimately, the accuracy of any clinical diagnosis is proven by a positive response to a
specific treatment. Although some euthyroid dogs experience temporary improvement in
their coats and skin with T 4 supplementation, permanent resolution of all metabolic and
dermatologic signs of hypothyroidism confirms the accuracy of the diagnosis. If the diagnosis of hypothyroidism is based on an evaluation with near 100% sensitivity and specificity, treatment can be started on a once-daily basis and clinical response can be expected.
The question remains as to the best treatment protocol for the cases where thyroid testing
cannot be performed, is inconclusive, or may be confounded by intercurrent disease or
drug therapy. If once-daily treatment is instituted and the dog needs twice-daily administration, response to treatment will be incomplete and the accuracy of the diagnosis comes
under question. To avoid this problem, it is best to start treatment on a twice-daily basis.
If the diagnosis was correct, the dog will return to normal with the T 4 supplementation.
Once the expected response occurs, the frequency or administration can be reduced to
once daily to see if the response can be sustained. If the clinical signs start to recur with
this modification, twice-daily treatments are needed.

864 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

Although no studies have used levothyroxine from different manufacturers in the
same dogs, data suggest that bioavailability does vary with the product used." Accordingly,
the veterinary clinician should select an effective product and use it to the exclusion of all
others. Because the clinician has little control over what product a pharmacy catering to
humans dispenses, prescriptions for levothyroxine should not be written.
Most of the dermatologic and metabolic abnormalities in hypothyroid dogs are correctable with treatment. Some lesions (e.g., scars over pressure points) do not disappear
entirely, but new ones should not develop. Dogs with attitudinal abnormalities (e.g.,
lethargy, depression) respond rapidly (within 2 to 4 weeks) to levothyroxine therapy.
Response in the skin is slower, and the owner must be told to administer the drug for at
least 3 months. Initial skin changes usually do not become apparent for approximately 4
weeks. Unless warned of this slow response time, many owners stop treatment after a
month of no change because all other conditions they have treated in their pets have
responded within this period. Most dogs are normal or nearly so by 3 to 4 months of
treatment, but it can take longer to regrow the long-flowing coat of some breeds such as
the Afghan hound.
Dogs with cardiac disease experience a change in cardiac function with treatment and
should be started on lower doses of levothyroxine; otherwise, heart failure may be precipitated."? The following protocol for levothyroxine is recommended: 0.005 mg/kg every 12
hours for 2 weeks, then 0.01 mg/kg every 12 hours for 2 weeks, then 0.015 mg/kg every
12 hours for 2 weeks, then up to routine maintenance dosage. In addition, patients with
concurrent hypoadrenocorticism should not be treated for hypothyroidism until their
adrenal insufficiency is corrected and stabilized with medication. Thyroid hormone therapy
can also necessitate altered doses of insuliu'P and certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin and
phenobarbital) in cases being managed with those agents. 48
Liothyronine (T3) may also be used to treat canine hypothyroidism but is rarely
indicated. I. 2. 102 It should be given orally at 4 to 6 JLg/kg every 8 hours, thus necessitating
more frequent administration and greater expense.
Treatment of myxedema coma is a medical emergency. I. 2. 35. 67a. 77. 113 Therapy consists
of IV administration of levothyroxine or oral liothyronine by gastric tube, mechanical
respiratory support, IV administration of glucocorticoids and broad-spectrum antibiotics,
and passive rewarming. 67a
The reasons for therapeutic failure with thyroid hormones are multiple. The most
common reasons are incorrect diagnosis, failure to recognize other intercurrent endocrinopathies (e.g., hypothyroidism in a dog with a sex hormone imbalance), and insufficient
therapy (e.g., insufficient course of treatment, wrong dosage, wrong frequency of administration, use of a product with poor bioavailability, and poor owner compliance). After the
clinician has determined that the correct dosage of an appropriate medication was dispensed and that the clients are administering the medication appropriately, post-pill
testing is the next step in determining why the dog's response was poor.
In dogs, TT 4 levels peak 4 to 6 hours after oral administration of levothyroxine and
decline thereafter.P' With the administration of a satisfactory dose of an absorbable product, the TT 4 level should be within the normal range at 4 to 6 hours. Values at or slightly
above the upper limit of normal are expected. 59 Dogs given the medication once daily
have higher peak values than dogs that receive that dosage divided into two equal doses."
If the peak TT 4 value is too high or low, dosage adjustments are necessary. The adequacy
of a new dosage must be determined by additional post-pill testing in 2 to 4 weeks.
Because the half-life of T 4 can vary from dog to dog, an adequate peak value in a dog
receiving once-daily treatment does not necessarily guarantee that normal levels are maintained during the entire 24-hour period. If this dog's response is poor or incomplete, a
24-hour post-pill TT 4 value should be evaluated. If that TT 4 is well below normal, the
single dose must be increased or the dog should be treated twice daily.
Dogs with autoantibodies to T 4 cannot be monitored by conventional post-pill testing
because the autoantibodies interfere with the TT 4 assay. In these cases, free T 4 can be
used for monitoring.f" The post-pill fT 4 level should be at or slightly above the upper
limit of normal at 4 to 6 hours. TSH levels can also be used for monitoring and should be
within the normal range with appropriate T 4 replacement therapy. Because some hypothy-

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 865

roid dogs do not have elevated TSH levels and TT 4 levels may be too high despite normal
TSH levels, monitoring via TSH levels is least desirable.
Post-pill testing is unnecessary in dogs that show a satisfactory response to treatment
with no clinical signs of overdosage. If clinical signs return later in the dog's life, testing at
that point is indicated. Hypothyroid dogs rarely show clinical signs of overdosage when
they are given 0.02 mg/kg of levothyroxine twice daily. If signs occur, post-pill testing
should be performed immediately. If the TT 4 value is greatly elevated above normal
levels, the diagnosis of hypothyroidism must be questioned. Moderate elevations above
normal levels indicate overdosage and suggest that the half-life of levothyroxine may be
longer in this dog. Some investigators decrease the dosage but maintain the twice-daily
administration, whereas other researchers reduce treatment to once daily. Too few dogs
are recognized with this problem to allow for specific recommendations.
When normal dogs are given levothyroxine, their responsiveness to TSH decreases
after 4 weeks of treatment and continued treatment results in increased unresponsiveness
and histologic evidence of thyroid inactivity. 104, 105 Although unproved, clinical evidence
suggests that unnecessary administration of levothyroxine for long periods eventually induces a secondary hypothyroidism, necessitating lifelong replacement therapy.
Treatment of secondary hypothyroidism is essentially the same as that described for
primary hypothyroidism. Dietary iodine deficiency is corrected by supplementing dogs
with dietary iodine at 34 p,g/kg/day and cats with 100 p,g/day.ll

Feline Hypothyroidism
Other than congenital hypothyroidism, naturally occurring spontaneous hypothyroidism has
been documented in only one cat. 128
CLINICAL FEATURES

Signs of congenital hypothyroidism in cats are similar to signs in the dog. 19 , 74, 122, 142, 148
The kittens are born normal, but are obviously different from their littermates by 4 to 6
weeks of age. Affected cats have a decreased rate of growth, with stunting, and become
disproportionate dwarfs. They are lethargic, mentally dull, and have depressed appetites.
Although they have full haircoats, the coat is dull and dry and has fewer primary hairs
than normal. Unless treatment is instituted soon after signs begin, death can occur within
2 weeks. In one cat colony, autoimmune thyroiditis with an autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance was documented.v"
When experimental adult cats underwent thyroidectomy by radiation and were followed for 96 weeks, the systemic and cutaneous signs were far different from those in
hypothyroid dogs. 153 Clinically, the cats were initially lethargic but returned to normal
status spontaneously. No change in appetite or body weight was recognized. The cats
groomed less than normal, which resulted in dorsal matting and seborrhea, and experienced alopecia of the pinnae, pressure points, and dorsal and lateral tail base region. With
the sensitivity of the eat's thyroid axis to iodine levels.P' iodine depletion can cause
clinical signs. Experimentally deprived cats exhibited cutaneous changes more typical of
the dog. 15 The coats became dry with easily epilated hairs, and symmetric alopecia
developed on the lateral neck, the thorax:, and the abdomen. The skin was dry, scaly, and
thickened.
The cat with spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroidism resembled dogs with that disease. 128 The cat was lethargic, thermophilic, inappetent, and obese. The eat's face was
puffY and the coat was dull, dry, seborrheic, and lighter in color than normal (Fig.
10-45). Hair regrowth at clipped sites was poor. The diagnosis was confirmed by TSH
response test and thyroid biopsy.
DIAGNOSIS

Because naturally occurring acquired hypothyroidism is so rare in cats, no data exist on
the diagnostlc value of hemograms, chemistry profiles, and other tests used in the dog.

866 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-45. Hair loss and scaling in a cat with
spontaneous hypothyroidism. (From Rand JS, et aI:
Spontaneous adult -onset hypothyroidism in a cat. J Vet
Intern Med 7:272, 1993.)

Unlike puppies, kittens have adult cat levels of TT 4 and fT 4 from birth. TT 3 and fT 3 levels
are low until 5 weeks of age. 16i As in the dog, isolated measurement of TT4 has very poor
discriminating value in the diagnosis of feline hypothyroidism. Cats with common nonthyroidal illnesses such as diabetes mellitus, liver disease, or renal disease have TT 4 values
well below normal or normal.P- 121, 152, 1.56 Measurement of fT4 may be more reliable in the
detection of hypothyroidism. In one study, fT4 values were not decreased in cats with
nonthyroidal illness.P"
When either 1 IUlcat or 1 IUlkg of TSH is given intravenously, TT 4 levels peak at 6
hours. TT 3 and fT 4 levels peak at 7 hours. Total T 4 levels should double and fT4 values
should triple in euthyroid cats.?" 146 When 0.1 mg/cat of TRH is given intravenously, TT4
and fT 4 levels peak at 4 hours and increase onefold and twofold, respectively. Vomiting at
the injection of TRH occurred in 4 of 13 cats. 146

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Appropriate doses of thyroid hormones for cats have not been studied in detail. Cats
bilaterally thyroidectomized for hyperthyroidism typically receive between 0.05 to 0.2 mg
of levothyroxine every 24 hours or 30 J-Lg of liothyronine every 8 hours. 148 , 155 These doses
should be adequate for cats with congenital or acquired hypothyroidism. The cat with
spontaneous adult-onset disease was given 0.1 mg every 24 hours and returned to normal
status after 3 months of treatment.P" Typical of dogs, constitutional changes were noted
after 1 week of treatment, whereas skin changes started about week 6 of treatment.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 867

FIGURE 10-46. Overgrown claws
in a hyperthyroid cat.

Feline Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism and diabetes mellitus are the most common endocrine disorders of the
cat. I. 2, 154 The cause of feline hyperthyroidism is usually a solitary thyroid adenoma or
multinodular adenomatous hyperplasia of the thyroid. Thyroid carcinomas are rare. Clinical signs are due to an accelerated basal metabolic rate and increased sensitivity to
catecholamines.
Feline hyperthyroidism occurs in older cats, 6 to 20 years of age, with no apparent
breed or sex predilections. Common clinical signs include polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria,
weight loss, hyperactivity, tachycardia, vomiting, and diarrhea.P' Cutaneous abnormalities
occur in approximately 30% of cases and include excessive shedding and matting of the
haircoat, focal or symmetric alopecia associated with excessive grooming (see Fig.
1O-43H), increased rate of claw growth (Fig. 10-46), dry or greasy seborrhea, thin skin,
and peripheral arteriovenous fistula. l . 2, 154 In chronic cases, there is complete truncal
alopecia with thin, hypotonic skin, mimicking hyperadrenocorticism (Fig. 10-47),u
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings, and elevated basal TT 4 ,
fT 4 , or TT 3 levels. Common biochemical abnormalities in hyperthyroid cats include elevated levels of serum alkaline phosphatase, serum lactate dehydrogenase, and serum

FIGURE 10-47. Truncal hair
loss with thin hypotonic skin in a
chronically hyperthyroid cat.

868 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
aspartate transaminase. More than 50% of hyperthyroid cats have TT 4 levels that overlap
those of normal cats." In these cases, hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed by fT 4 measurement, the T3 suppression test, or the TRH stimulation test." Because fT 4 levels can be
increased in nonthyroidal disease, fT 4 should always be evaluated with the TT4. 115. 123 The
T3 suppression test involves the oral administration of 15 to 25 JLg of liothyronine every 8
hours for seven doses.s" 129 A sample for TT 4 and fT 4 determinations is taken before the
medication administration is started and then 2 to 4 hours after the seventh dose.
Hyperthyroid cats show little or no change in their TT 4 or fT 4 levels, whereas euthyroid
cats show a 50% reduction in TT 4 and fT 4 values. Hyperthyroid cats show no change in
TT 4 levels after TRH administration.57
Therapy includes surgical excision, radioactive iodine treatment.P? and the administration of antithyroid drugs (methimazole, carbimazole, stable iodine, and calcium ipodate).94. 155

Diabetes Mellitus
In human beings, diabetes mellitus is associated with a number of dermatologic disorders,
including vascular complications (microangiopathy and atherosclerosis), necrobiosis lipoidica, granuloma annulare, scleredema, fibrovascular papillomas, yellow nails, rubeosis, bacterial and fungal infections, diabetic neuropathy, pruritus, idiopathic bullae, alopecia,
xanthomatosis, and poor wound healing. 436 Up to 30% of humans with diabetes mellitus
experience a skin disorder that is either an early indicator of undiagnosed diabetes or a
complication of known diabetes. In dogs and cats, skin lesions have been reported to
occur rarely or in as many as one third of cases."
The most common dermatologic manifestations of diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats
appear to be bacterial pyoderma (Fig. 1O-48A), seborrheic skin disease (see Fig. 1048B), thin and hypotonic skin, and varying degrees of alopecia (Fig. 10-49). The thin,
hypotonic skin, with or without alopecia, probably results from protein catabolism. The
seborrheic skin disease (usually generalized seborrhea sicca) is probably due to protein
catabolism and abnormal lipid metabolism.
Diabetics are predisposed to infections, particularly those caused by coagulase-positive
staphylococci and Candida Spp.11, 436, 441 This susceptibility appears to be due to abnormalities in neutrophil chemotaxis, phagocytosis, intracellular killing, and cell-mediated (T-cell)
immune responses. These abnormalities mayor may not be totally corrected through
restoration of normoglycemia with insulin therapy.
Rarely, pruritus vulvae, xanthomatosis, and necrobiosis lipoidica have been reported in
association with diabetes mellitus in dogs.1, 2, 446, 455 Xanthomatosis has been reported in
cats with naturally occurring and megestrol acetate-induced diabetes mellitus.

Necrolytic Migratory Erythema
Necrolytic migratory erythema is a term coined to describe the skin rash in humans with
a glucagon-secreting pancreatic tumor (glucagonoma) or, rarely, hepatic cirrhosis and
other miscellaneous gastrointestinal disorders. The rash has been recognized in dogs and
the cat, but a standard nomenclature has not been accepted.r" The terms hepatocutaneous syndrome,!I, 430, 442. 443 superficial necrolytic dermatitis,4.433 and metabolic epidermal
necrosis 434. 447 are commonly used to describe the same condition. However, epidermal
necrosis and necrolysis are not features of this disorder.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The skin lesions in necrolytic migratory erythema are due to degeneration of the keratinocytes, which results in laminar high-level epidermal edema and degeneration. The specific

"See references 1, 2, 11, 17, 424, 446, 455.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 869

FIGURE 10-48. A, Diabetes mellitus. Severe facial bacterial pyoderma. B, Diabetes mellitus. Hypotrichosis with
a greasy seborrhea. C, Necrolytic migratory erythema. Temporal muscle atrophy with crusting dermatitis of the
periocular areas and muzzle. D, Necrolytic migratory erythema. Hyperkeratosis and fissuring of footpads. E, Necrolytic migratory erythema. Scrotal ulceration and crusting. F, Necrolytic migratory erythema. Intact and crusted vesicular lesions. G, Xanthomas of the hock region in a cat. (Courtesy of K. Helton.) H, Xanthomas of the pads of a cat.
(Courtesy of D. Chester.)

870 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-49. Diabetes mellitus
in a cat. Abdominal hair loss.

cause of the degeneration is unknown but probably results from cellular starvation or
some other nutritional imbalance. Cutaneous hypoaminoacidemia or deficiencies in biotin,
essential fatty acids, or zinc have been proposed.v'v 442, 443 These nutritional deficiencies
result from metabolic abnormalities caused by hyperglucagonemia, liver dysfunction, or
combinations of these.
In humans, necrolytic migratory erythema is a cutaneous marker for an a2-glucagonproducing islet cell tumor of the pancreas. Successful resection of the tumor corrects the
metabolic irregularities associated with the hyperglucagonemia, and the eruption heals
spontaneously. In a small percentage of patients, necrolytic migratory erythema occurs in
association with hepatic cirrhosis and its associated hyperglucagonemia, pancreatitis, celiac
sprue, or zinc deficiency.v" A reverse in the incidence data appears to be true in dogs.
Approximately 75 cases of necrolytic migratory erythema in dogs are reported in the
veterinary literature, and only five (6.7%) have had a documented pancreatic tumor. The
remainder of patients have hepatic disease that is well characterized ultrasonographically
and histologically, Although the hepatopathy occasionally has been associated with the ingestion of mycotoxins or anticonvulsant medications, its cause in most dogs is unknown.P'
Dogs with glucagonomas typically have elevated plasma glucagon levels,423, 444, 451, 452 whereas
those with hepatic disease most often do not. The inability to consistently document
hyperglucagonemia in the liver group probably relates to the highly efficient extraction of
glucagon from the plasma by the liver.45o The one case reported in the cat was associated
with a pancreatic tumor.v"

CLINICAL FEATURES
Necrolytic migratory erythema is typically seen in old dogs. 433, 442, 443, 454 No consistent
breed predisposition has been identified. Skin disease is the presenting complaint in most
dogs, although the eruption occasionally develops after the recognition of systemic illness,
especially the polyuria and polydipsia associated with diabetes mellitus.v" Skin lesions
occur in areas of trauma, especially the muzzle, mucocutaneous areas of the face (see Fig.
1O-48C), distal limbs, and footpads (see Fig. 1O-48D). Lesions can also be in the mouth,
on the pinnae, on the external genitalia (see Fig. 1O-48E), on the elbows and hocks, and
along the ventrum. Most lesions are crusted with subjacent erosion or ulceration, but
intact vesicular lesions (see Fig. 1O-48F) occur occasionally.
Routine laboratory evaluation of most dogs usually shows normocytic, normochromic,
nonregenerative anemia; borderline or frank hyperglycemia; elevations in activity of liver
enzymes, especially serum alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase; and hypoal-

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 871

buminemia.ss' Dogs with liver disease have increased sulfobromophthalein retention or
postprandial bile acid levels, abnormal liver anatomy on palpation, and a unique, pathognomonic "honeycomb" pattern on ultrasound evaluation of the liver. 45o Antinuclear antibody titers can be postive. 44,3. 444 In contrast, dogs with pancreatic tumors typically show no
biochemical abnormalities other than hypoalbuminemia. The liver is normal by palpation
and ultrasonography. Ultrasonographic identification of the pancreatic mass is extremely
rare. Special laboratory tests show hypoaminoacidemia, variable plasma glucagon concentrations, and elevated insulin concentrations.v"
The one case reported in the cat occurred in an ll-year-old with a short history of
anorexia, depression, and skin disease.v'? The initial skin lesions involved the axillae,
proximal front limbs, and dorsum. With time, the ventrum, lateral thorax, and groin
became involved. The dorsal skin was thickened and covered with adherent white scales,
whereas the lesions elsewhere were exudative, alopecic, and reddened. Clinical biochemical abnormalities were nonspecific, and none of the alterations typical in the dog was
present. At necropsy, the liver was enlarged and a large pancreatic carcinoma was present
at the junction of the left and right lobes.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations in the dog include pemphigus foliaceus, systemic
lupus erythematosus, zinc deficiency, and generic dog food dermatosis. If the laboratory
evaluation is performed before skin biopsy, all differential diagnosnc considerations except
systemic lupus erythematosus can be excluded because dogs with pemphigus foliaceus,
zinc deficiency, and generic dog food dermatosis rarely have the abnormalities described.
If all cases in the cat resemble the one reported, the differential diagnosis should include
the exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma, FeLV- or FlY-associated dermatitis,
pemphigus foliaceus, or acquired skin fragility syndrome with secondary bacterial folliculitis.
Cytologic examination of the vesicular fluid reveals complete acellularity in this disorder, whereas inflammatory cells occur in the other differential diagnostic conditions. Skin
biopsy of early lesions shows diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, with high-level confluent
vacuolation of keratinocytes resulting in a band of upper-level epidermal edema (Figs.
10-50 and 10-51).4. 433 Dermal changes are usually minimal and include superficial
edema and a perivascular accumulation of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Chronic lesions
rarely show the epidermal edema and have marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal hyperplasia, and surface crusting. Chronic lesions may have a superficial interstitial to
lichenoid inflammatory infiltrate. Bacteria, dermatophytes, or yeast may be visible in the
superficial keratin layer.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Necrolytic migratory erythema is a cutaneous marker for a serious internal disease with a
short survival time. One study showed that most dogs died or were euthanized within 5
months of the development of skin lesions.w' Cases due to an identifiable glucagonoma
should be treated surgically. Because dogs with necrolytic migratory erythema often have
subclinical pancreatitis, surgery can be difficult with a significant risk of postoperative
complications.f" Although too few cases have been reported, glucagonomas in dogs appear to metastasize quickly.423, 444, 451, 452 In these cases, removal of the primary tumor can
return the dog to normal for an extended but not indefinite period of time. One of us
(W.H.M.) administered somatostatin (6 J,Lg/kg subcutaneously q8h) to a dog with a metastatic tumor, and the skin lesions vastly improved within 14 days, Because of renal
dysfunction and the high cost of the somatostatin ($100 per day), the treatments were not
continued and the dog was euthanized.
Dogs with liver disease are more problematic. Treatment with corticosteroids usually
improves the skin lesions but eventually precipitates a diabetic crisis. 454 Unless the hepatopathy is associated with mycotoxin ingestion, anticonvulsant medications, or some other

872 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases

FIGURE 10-50. Canine necrolytic migratory erythema. Marked edema of the upper one half of
epidermis with diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

FIGURE 10-51. Close-up of Figure 10-50. Marked intercellular and intracellular edema with
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 873

FIGURE 10-52. Feline xanthoma. Typical xanthoma cells.

resolvable condition, the animal cannot be cured. Because the skin lesions have a nutritional basis, supplementation can be of some benefit. The formula used most widely was
developed at the University of California'P and consists of high-quality protein (1 egg
yolk/4.5 kg), a zinc supplement (e.g., zinc sulfate: 10 mg/kg/day), and a fatty acid supplement. If there is any clinical or biochemical evidence of pancreatitis, pancreatic enzymes
can be added. Although amino acid hyperalimentation should be beneficial, it is very
expensive and may not be of significant benefit. 450 If an amino acid profile is available, a
supplement specifically formulated for the patient can be used. Some investigators use the
commercially available large animal product (Aminosyn, Abbott) and administer 500 mll
dog over 6 to 8 hours. 449 Because the supplementation does not address the underlying
hepatopathy, the disease progresses and eventually results in the animal's death.

Xanthomas
Xanthomas are benign granulomatous lesions associated with an abnormality in lipid
metabolism. Xanthomatosis has been reported in cats with presumed hereditary hyperlipoproteinemia.s'< 431, 438 No reports of xanthomatosis in Miniature schnauzers with hyperlipidemia have been presented. Cases of apparently idiopathic xanthomas have been reported
in the cat. 427 . 429 Most cases of xanthomatosis in dogs 428 and cats'" 437. 440 have been
associated with the feeding of high-fat foods or treats453 or with naturally occurring or
drug-induced (megestrol acetate) diabetes melhtus.v"
Lesions consist of multiple whitish or yellow papules, nodules, or plaques, which may
be ulcerated (see Fig. 1O-48G and H). The surrounding skin is erythematous, and the
lesions can be painful or pruritic. The head, distal extremities, feet, and bony prominences
are typically involved.
Histopathologically, there is a nodular to diffuse infiltration of foamy macrophages and
variable numbers of multinucleate histiocytic giant cells (Fig. 10-52). Lipid lakes are
often prominent throughout the affected dermis. Granulomatous inflammation and fibroplasia may also occur.
Lesions associated with diabetes mellitus or hyperlipoproteinemia resolve spontaneously with resolution of the underlying problem. Surgical removal without correction of
the triggering cause usually results in relapse.v" In cats with idiopathic hypertriglyceri-

874 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
demia and xanthomatosis.?' feeding a low-fat commercial diet (Prescription Diet canine
rid [Hill's]) resulted in complete clinical remission within 30 days. New lesions developed
each time a regular commercial cat food was given for even a short period of time.

Minoxidil in Canine Alopecia
Minoxidil is a vasodilator that has been used topically or orally to treat people with
pattern baldness and alopecia areata.r" Minoxidil is known to increase cutaneous blood
flow, have direct effects on keratinocytes (prolong life in culture, stimulate differentiation,
and increase mitotic activity of matrix cells), and suppress lymphocyte-mediated immunologic phenomena.
When neonatal descendants of Mexican hairless dogs were treated topically with 3%
minoxidil daily for 1 month, all dogs grew hair. 439 Application to adult dogs of this
breeding resulted in no hair growth. Other dogs with alopecia of undetermined cause
have been treated with minoxidi1. 425 , 435 In the most detailed study,435 all dogs had bilaterally symmetric alopecia isolated to the flank or dorsal lumbar regions, and all dogs were
breeds (Boxer, Doberman pinscher, Staffordshire bull terrier, and Airedale terrier) prone
to follicular dysplasia, some cases of which are seasonally recurrent (see Chaps. 10 and
11). Dogs were treated with 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg of minoxidil given orally every 24 hours. Of
12 dogs studied, 4 had a good response, 2 had a partial response, 4 had no response, and
2 dogs spontaneously regrew their hair before treatment could be given. These data are
difficult to interpret and could all be explained by a spontaneously waxing and waning
follicular dysplasia. In addition, 50% of the treated dogs experienced moderate to severe
side effects, including weakness, lethargy, and collapse. We do not recommend the use of
oral minoxidil in dogs at this time.

• References
General References
1. Chastain CB, Ganjam VK: Clinical Endocrinology of
Companion Animals. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia,
1986.
2. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1996.
3. Greco DS: Endocrine emergencies. Part Il: Adrenal,
thyroid, and parathyroid disorders. Comp Cont Educ
19:27, 1997.
4. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
5. Hess RS, Ward CR: Diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:204, 1998.
6. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Endocrine responses of normal
cats to TSH and synthetic ACTH administration.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:737, 1984.
7. Kooistra HS, et al: Polyglandular deficiency syndrome
in a boxer dog: Thyroid hormone and glucocorticoid
deficiency. Vet Q 17:59, 1995.
8. Meij BP, et al: Assessment of a combined anterior
pituitary function test in beagle dogs: Rapid sequential intravenous administration of four hypothalamic
releasing hormones. Dom Anim Endocrinol 13:161,
1996.
9. Meij BP, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone responses after single administration of thyrotropinreleasing hormone and combined administration of
four hypothalamic releasing hormones in beagle dogs.
Dom Anim Endocrinol 13:465, 1996.
10. Moriello KA, et al: Determination of thyroxine, triiodothyronine, and cortisol changes during simultaneous

adrenal and thyroid function tests in healthy dogs.
Am J Vet Res 48:458, 1987.
11. Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
12. Quadri SK, Palazzolo DL: How aging affects the canine endocrine system. Vet Med 86:692, 1991.
13. Reimers TJ, et al: Changes in serum thyroxine and
cortisol in dogs after simultaneous injection of TSH
and ACTH. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:923, 1982.
14. Rosychuk RAW: Cutaneous manifestations of endocrine disease in dogs. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
20:287, 1998.
15. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
16. Scott DW: Histopathologic findings in the endocrine
skin disorders of the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:
73, 1982.
17. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.

Thyroid Physiology and Disease
18. Ahsan MK, et al: Immunohistochemical localization of
thyroid hormone nuclear receptors in human hair follicles and in vitro effect of I-triiodothyronine on cultured cell of hair follicles and skin. J Med Invest 44:
179, 1998.
19. Arnold D, et al: Goitrous hypothyroidism and dwarfism in a kitten. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:735, 1984.
20. Beale KM: Dermatologic manifestations of hypothyroidism. In: Hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and Clinical
Manifestations. Daniels Pharmaceuticals, St. Petersburg, 1993, P 16.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 875
21. Beale KM, et aI: Correlation of racing and reproductive performance in Greyhounds with response to thyroid function testing. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:263,
1992.
22. Beale KM, et aI: Prevalence of antithyroglobulin antibodies detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of canine serum. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:745,
1990.
23. Beale KM, et aI: Serum thyroid hormone concentrations and thyrotropin responsiveness in dogs with
generalized dermatologic disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1715, 1992.
24. Beale KM, et aI: Comparison of two doses of aqueous
bovine thyrotropin for thyroid function testing in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:865, 1990.
25. Behrend EN, et aI: Effect of storage conditions on
cortisol, total thyroxine, and free thyroxine concentrations in serum and plasma of dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:1564, 1998.
26. Benjamin SA, et aI: Association between lymphocytic
thyroiditis, hypothyroidism, and thyroid neoplasia in
beagles. Vet Pathol 33:486, 1996.
27. Bichsel P, et aI: Neurologic manifestations associated
with hypothyroidism in four dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 192:1745, 1989.
28. Brent BA, Hershman JM: Thyroxine therapy in patients with severe nonthyroidal illnesses and low thyroxine concentration. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 63:1,
1986.
29. Bruner JM, et aI: Effect of time of sample collection
in serum thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations
in euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:1572, 1998.
30. Bruyette DS, et aI: Effect of thyrotropin storage on
thyroid-stimulating hormone response testing in normal dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1:91, 1987.
31. Budsberg SC, et aI: Thyroxin-responsive unilateral
forelimb lameness and generalized neuromuscular disease in four hypothyroid dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
202:1859, 1993.
32. Campbell KL, Davis CA: Effects of thyroid hormones
on serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:752, 1990.
33. Chastain CB, et aI: Congenital hypothyroidism in a
dog due to an iodide organification defect. Am J Vet
Res 44:1257, 1983.
34. Chastain CB, et aI: Anti-triiodothyronine antibodies
associated with hypothyroidism and lymphocytic thyroiditis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:531, 1989.
35. Chastain CB: Unusual manifestations of hypothyroidism in dogs. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1992, p 327.
36. Conaway DH, et aI: Clinical and histological features
of primary progressive, familial thyroiditis in a colony
of borzoi dogs. Vet Pathol 22:439, 1985.
37. Cortese L, et aI: Hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea
associated with primary hypothyroidism in a bitch.
J Small Anim Pract 38:572, 1997.
38. Credille KM, et aI: Clinical, morphologic, morphometric, and cell proliferation assessment of hair follicles in canine hypothyroidism. J Invest Dermatol 110:
581, 1998.
39. Daminet S, et aI: Short-term influence of prednisone
and phenobarbital on thyroid function in euthyroid
dogs. Can Vet J 40:411, 1999.
40. Deeg C, et aI: Canine Hypothyreose: Nachweis von

Autoantikorpem gegen Thyreoglobulin. Tierarztl Prax
25:170,1997.
41. Delverdier M, et aI: Les mucinoses cutanees du chien
et du chat: Etude histologique et histochimique a
partir de 106 cas. Rev Med Vet 146:33, 1995.
42. Dixon RM, et aI: Comparison of endogenous serum
thyrotropin (cTSH) concentrations with bovine TSH
response test results in euthyroid and hypothyroid
dogs. Proc Annu Meet Am Coil Vet Intern Med 15:
668, 1997.
43. Dixon RM, Mooney CT: Evaluation of serum free
thyroxine and thyrotropin concentrations in the diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism. J Small Anim Pract
40:72, 1999.
44. Dixon RM, et aI: Serum thyrotropin concentrations: A
new diagnostic test for canine hypothyroidism. Vet
Rec 138:594, 1996.
45. Dixon RM, Mooney CT: Canine serum thyroglobulin
autoantibodies in health, hypothyroidism, and nonthyroidal illness. Res Vet Sci 66:243, 1999.
45a. Dixon RM, et aI: Epidemiological, clinical, haematological and biochemical characteristics of canine hypothyroidism, Vet Rec 145:481, 1999.
46. Doliger S, et al: Histochemical study of cutaneous
mucins in hypothyroid dogs. Vet Pathol 32:628, 1995.
47. Engler D, Burger AG: The deiodination of the iodothyronines and of their derivatives in man. Endocrinol Rev 5:151, 1984.
48. Ferguson DC: An internal medical perspective of hypothyroidism. In: Hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and
Clinical Manifestations. Daniels Pharmaceuticals, St.
Petersburg, 1993, p 2.
49. Ferguson DC, Hoenig M: Reexamination of dosage
regimens for I-thyroxine (T4 ) in the dog: Bioavailability and persistence of TSH suppression. Proc Annu
Meet Am Coil Vet Intern Med 15:668, 1997.
50. Ford SL, et aI: Insulin resistance in three dogs with
hypothyroidism and diabetes mellitus. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 202:1478, 1993.
51. Frank LA: Comparison of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) to thyrotropin (TSH) simulation for
evaluating thyroid function in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 32:481, 1996.
52. Gaschen F, et al: Recognition of triiodothyroninecontaining epitopes in canine thyroglobulin by circulating thyroglobulin autoantibodies. Am J Vet Res 54:
244, 1993.
53. Gaskill CL, et aI: Effects of phenobarbital treatment
on serum thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone
concentrations in epileptic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
215:489, 1999.
54. Gookin JL, et aI: Clinical hypothyroidism associated
with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1028, 1999.
55. Gosselin SJ, et aI: Autoimmune lymphocytic thyroiditis in dogs. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 3:185, 1982.
56. Graham PA, et aI: Heterogeneity of thyroid function
in beagles with lymphocytic thyroiditis. Proc Annu
Meet Am CoIl Vet Intern Med 15:667, 1997.
57. Graves TK, Peterson ME: Occult hyperthyroidism in
cats. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 334.
58. Greco DS, et aI: The effect of levothyroxine treatment on resting energy expenditure of hypothyroid
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 12:7, 1998.
59. Greco D: Use of endogenous thyrotropin and free
thyroxine determinations for monitoring thyroid re-

876 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
placement treatment in dogs with hypothyroidism. In:
Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 330.
60. Greco DS, et al: Congenital hypothyroid dwarfism in
a family of Giant Schnauzers. J Vet Intern Med 5:57,
1991.
61. Gunaratnam P: The effect of thyroxine on hair
growth on the dog. J Small Anim Pract 27:17, 1986.
62. Haines DM, et al: Survey of thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs. Am J Vet Res 45:1493, 1984.
63. Haines DM, et al: The detection of canine autoantibodies to thyroid antigens by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, hemagglutination, and indirect immunofluorescence. Can J Comp Med 48:262, 1984.
64. Haines DM, Penhale WJ: Experimental thyroid autoimmunity in the dog. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 9:
221, 1985.
65. Hall lA, et al: Effect of trimethoprimlsulfamethoxazole on thyroid function in dogs with pyoderma.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:1159, 1993.
66. Hansen SR, et al: Acute overdose of levothyroxine in
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1512, 1992.
67. Hasler A, Rohner K: Schwerwiegende Reaktionen
nach TSH-Stimulationstest beim Hund. Schweiz Arch
Tierheilkd 134:423, 1992.
67a. Henik RA, Dixon RM: Intravenous administration of
levothyroxine for treatment of suspected myxedema
coma complicated by severe hypothermia in a dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:713, 2000.
68. Heripret D: Diagnostic biologique de l'hypothyroldie
canine. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 32:31, 1997.
69. Hoenig M, Ferguson DC: Comparison of TRH-stimulated thyrotropin (cTSH) to TRH- and TSH-stimulated T 4 in euthyroid, hypothyroid, and sick dogs.
Proc Annu Meet Am Coli Vet Intern Med 15:668,
1997.
70. Hoenig M, Ferguson DC: Assessment of thyroid
functional reserve in the cat by the thyrotropin-stimulation test. Am J Vet Res 44:1229, 1983.
71. Iversen L, et al: Development and validation of an
improved enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the
detection of thyroglobulin autoantibodies in canine
serum samples. Domest Anim Endocrinol 15:525,
1998.
72. Iversen L, et al: Evaluation of the analytical performance of an enzyme immunometric assay (EIA) deSigned to measure endogenous thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) in canine serum samples. J Vet Med
Assoc 45:93, 1998.
72a. Iversen L, et al: Biological variation of canine serum
thyrotropin (TSH) concentration. Vet Clin Pathol 28:
16, 1999.
73. Jensen AL, et al: Evaluation of an immunoradiometric assay for thyrotropin in serum and plasma samples
of dogs with primary hypothyroidism. J Comp Pathol
114:339, 1996.
74. Jones BR, et al: Preliminary studies on congenital
hypothyroidism in a family of Abyssinian cats. Vet
Rec 131:145, 1992.
75. Kantrowitz LB, et al: Serum total thyroxine, total triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations in epileptic dogs treated with anticonvulsants.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1804, 1999.
76. Kaufman J, et al: Serum concentrations of thyroxine,
3,5,3'-triiodothyronine, thyrotropin, and prolactin in
dogs before and after thyrotropin-releasing hormone
administration. Am J Vet Res 46:486, 1985.

77. Kelly MJ, Hill JR: Canine myxedema stupor and
coma. Comp Cont Educ 6:1049, 1984.
78. Kemppainen RJ: Laboratory diaguosis of hypothyroidism. In: Hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and Clinical Manifestations. Daniels Pharmaceuticals, St. Petersburg,
1993, p 10.
79. Kemppainen RJ, Young DW: Canine triiodothyronine
autoantibodies. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds):
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 327.
80. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Autoantibodies to triiodothyronine and thyroxine in a golden retriever. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:195, 1996.
81. Kobayashi DL, et al: Serum thyroid hormone concentrations in clinically normal dogs after administration
of freshly reconstituted versus previously frozen and
stored thyrotropin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:597,
1990.
82. Larsson MG: Determination of free thyroxine and
cholesterol as a new screening test for canine hypothyroidism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:209, 1988.
83. Laurberg P: lodothyronine deiodination in the canine
thyroid, Domest Anim Endocrinol lL, 1984.
84. Li WI, et al: Effects of thyrotropin-releasing hormone
on serum concentrations of thyroxine and triiodothyronine in healthy, thyroidectomized, thyroxine-treated,
and propylthiouracil-treated dogs. Am J Vet Res 47:
163, 1986.
85. Liu SK, et al: Clinical and pathologic findings in dogs
with atherosclerosis: 21 cases (1970-1983). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 189:227, 1986.
86. Lucke VM, et al: Thyroid pathology in canine hypothyroidism. J Comp Pathol 93:415, 1983.
87. Medleau L, et al: Congenital hypothyroidism in a
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:341, 1985.
88. Meij BP, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone responses after Single administration of thyroid- releasing
hormone and combined administration of four hypothalamic releasing hormones in beagle dogs. Domest
Anim Endocrinol 13:465, 1996.
89. Melian C, et al: Evaluation of free T 4 and endogenous TSH as diagnostic tests for hypothyroidism in
dogs. Proc Annu Meet Am Coli Vet Intern Med 15:
667, 1997.
90. Meric SM, Rubin SI: Serum thyroxine concentrations
following fixed-dose radioactive iodine treatment in
hyperthyroid cats: 62 cases (1986-1989). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 197:621, 1990.
91. Miller AB, et al: Serial thyroid hormone concentrations in healthy euthyroid dogs, dogs with hypothyroidism, and euthyroid dogs with atopic dermatitis. Br
Vet J 148:451, 1992.
92. Mooney CT, Anderson TJ: Congenital hypothyroidism
in a boxer dog. J Small Anim Pract 34:31, 1993.
93. Mooney CT, et al: Effect of illness not associated
with the thyroid gland on serum total and free thyroxine concentrations in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
208:2004, 1996.
94. Mooney CT, Thoday KL: CVT update: Medical treatment of hyperthyroidism in cats. In: Bonagura JD
(ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 333.
95. Moore GE, et al: Effects of oral administration of
anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone on thyroid
hormone response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone
and thyrotropin in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet
Res 54:1993.
96. Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR: Radioimmunoassay moni-

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 877
toring with thyroid hormone concentrations in dogs
on thyroid replacement therapy: 2674 cases (19851987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:623, 1992.
97. Nachreiner RF, et al: Pharmacokinetics of L-thyroxine after its oral administration in dogs. Am J Vet Res
54:2091, 1993.
98. Nachreiner RF, et al: Prevalence of autoantibodies to
thyroglobulin in dogs with nonthyroidal illness. Am J
Vet Res 59:951, 1998.
99. Nelson RW, Ihle SL: Hypothyroidism in dogs and
cats: A difficult deficiency to diagnose. Vet Med 82:
60, 1987.
100. Nelson RW, et al: Serum free thyroxine concentration
in healthy dogs, dogs with hypothyroidism, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent illness. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 198:1401, 1991.
101. Panciera DL: Canine hypothyroidism. Part I. Clinical
findings and control of thyroid hormone secretion and
metabolism. Comp Cont Educ 12:689, 1990.
102. Panciera DL: Canine hypothyroidism. Part II: Thyroid function tests and treatment. Comp Cont Educ
12:943, 1990.
103. Panciera DL, Post K: Effect of oral administration of
sulfadiazine and trimethoprim in combination on thyroid function in dogs. Can J Vet Res 56:349, 1992.
104. Panciera 0 L, et al: Thyroid function tests in euthyroid dogs treated with L-thyroxine. Am J Vet Res 51:
22, 1989.
105. Panciera DL, et al: Quantitative morphologic study
on the pituitary and thyroid glands of dogs administered L-thyroxine. Am J Vet Res 51:27, 1990.
106. Panciera DL: Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases
(1987-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:761, 1994.
107. Panciera DL: Thyroid-function testing: Is the future
here? Vet Med 92:50, 1997.
108. Panciera DL, Johnson GS: Plasma von Willebrand
factor antigen concentration in dogs with hypothyroidism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1550, 1994.
109. Panciera DL, Johnson GS: Plasma von Willebrand
factor antigen concentration and buccal mucosal
bleeding time in dogs with experimental hypothyroidism. J Vet Intern Med 10:60, 1996.
1l0. Panciera DL: An echocardiographic and electrocardiographic study of cardiovascular function in hypothyroid dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:996, 1994.
111. Panciera DL: Clinical manifestations of canine hypothyroidtsm. Vet Med 92:44, 1997.
112. Panciera DL: Treating hypothyroidism. Vet Med 92:
58, 1997.
113. Panciera DL: Complications and concurrent conditions associated with hypothyroidism in dogs. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 327.
114. Panciera DL: Is it possible to diagnose canine hypothyroidism? J Small Anim Pract 40:152, 1999.
115. Paradis M, Page N: Serum free thyroxine concentrations measured by chemiluminescence in hyperthyroid and euthyroid cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:
489, 1996.
116. Paradis M, et al: Effects of administration of low dose
of frozen thyrotropin on serum total thyroxine concentrations in clinically normal dogs. Can Vet J 35:
367, 1994.
117. Paradis M, et al: Serum-free thyroxine concentrations,
measured by chemiluminescence assay before and after thyrotropin administration in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with dermatopathies. Can Vet J 37:289, 1996.

U8. Paradis M, et al: Studies of various diagnostic methods for canine hypothyroidism. Vet Dermatol 2:125,
1991.
U9. Patterson JS, et al: Neurologic manifestations of cerebrovascular atherosclerosis associated with primary
hypothyroidism in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:
499, 1985.
120. Peterson ME, et al: Effects of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism on serum thyroid hormone concentrations in the dog. Am J Vet Res 45:2034, 1984.
121. Peterson ME, Camble DA: Effect of nonthyroidal
illness on serum thyroxine concentrations in cats: 494
cases (1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1203, 1990.
122. Peterson ME: Feline hypothyroidism. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.E. Saunders
Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 1000.
123. Peterson ME, et al: Measurement of serum concentrations of total and free T 4 in hyperthyroid cats and
cats with nonthyroidal disease. Proc Am Coli Vet Intern Med 16:701, 1998.
124. Peterson ME, et al: Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2U:1396, 1997.
125. Quinlan WJ, Michaelson S: Homologous radioimmunoassay for canine thyrotropin: Response of normal
and x-irradiated dogs to propylthiouracil. Endocrinology 108:937, 1981.
126. Rachofsky MA: Clinical relevance of results from the
new canine specific endogenous TSH assay: A review
of 79 cases. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 4:1988.
127. Ramsey IK, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone and
total thyroxine concentrations in euthyroid, sick euthyroid and hypothyroid dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:
540, 1997.
128. Rand JS, et al: Spontaneous adult-onset hypothyroidism in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 7:272, 1993.
129. Refsal KR, et al: Use of triiodothyronine suppression
test for diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in ill cats that
have serum concentrations of iodothyronines within
normal range. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1594, 1991.
130. Refsal KR, et al: Thyroid hormone autoantibodies in
the dog: Distribution with serum concentrations of
thyroxine and thyrotropin in a laboratory survey. Proc
Annu Meet Am Coli Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
131. Reimers TJ, et al: Effects of reproductive state on
concentrations of thyroxine, 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine
and cortisol in serum of dogs. BioI Reprod 31:148,
1984.
132. Reimers TJ, et al: Effect of fasting on thyroxine,
3,5,3'-triiodothyronine, and cortisol concentrations in
serum of dogs. Am J Vet Res 47:2485, 1986.
133. Reimers TJ, et al: Effects of age, sex, and body size
on serum concentrations of thyroid and adrenocortical
hormones in dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:454, 1990.
134. Richardson HW: Evaluation of endogenous cTSH assay RIA test kit in clinically normal and suspect hypothyroid dogs. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 4:1988.
135. Robinson WF, et al: Congenital hypothyroidism in
Scottish deerhound puppies. Aust Vet J 65:386, 1988.
136. Rosenberg RM, et al: Abnormal lipogenesis in thyroid
hormone-deficient epidermis. J Invest Dermatol 86:
244,1986.
137. Rosychuk RAW: Dermatologic manifestations of canine hypothyroidism and the usefulness of dermato-

878 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
pathology in establishing a diagnosis. Canine Pract 22:
25, 1997.
138. Rudas P, et al: Impaired local deiodination of thyroxine to triiodothyronine in dogs with symmetrical truncal alopecia. Vet Res Commun 18:175, 1994.
139. Ruschig S, Kraft W: Bestimmung von caninem Thyreoideastimulierendem Hormon (cTSH) im Blutserum des Hundes und seine Reaktion in TRHStimulationstest. Tierarztl Prax 24:479, 1996.
140. Sauve F, et al: Evaluation de la function thyroidienne
chez les chiens de race Terre-Neuve. Med Vet Quebec 27:77, 1997.
141. Sauve F, Paradis M: Use of recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone for thyrotropin stimulation
test in euthyroid dogs. Can Vet J 41:215, 2000.
142. Schumm-Draeger PM, Fortmeyer HP: Autoimmune
thyroiditis-spontaneous disease models-cats. Exp
Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 104:12, 1996.
143. Scott-Moncrieff JCR, Nelson RW: Change in serum
thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration in response to administration of thyrotropin-releasing hormone to healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent diseases. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 213:1435, 1998.
144. Scott-Moncrieff JCR, et al.: Comparison of serum
concentrations of thyroid-stimulating hormone in
healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs
with concurrent disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:
387, 1998.
145. Simpson JW, van den Broek AHM: Fat absorption in
dogs with diabetes mellitus or hypothyroidism. Res
Vet Sci 50:346, 1991.
146. Sparks AH, et al: Thyroid function in the cat: Assessment by the TRH response test and thyrotropin stimulation test. J Small Anim Pract 32:59, 1991.
147. Sparkes AH, et al: Assessment of dose and time responses to TRH and thyrotropin in healthy dogs.
J Small Anim Pract 36:245, 1995.
148. Stephan I, Schutt-Mast I: Kongenitale Hypothyreose
mit disproportioniertem Zwergwuchs bei einer Katze.
K1eintierpraxis 40:701, 1995.
149. Stolp R, et al: Plasma cortisol response to thyrotropin
releasing hormone and luteinizing hormone releasing
hormone in healthy kennel dogs and in dogs with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol 93:365, 1982.
150. Sullivan P, et al: Altered platelet indices in dogs with
hypothyroidism and cats with hyperthyroidism. Am J
Vet Res 54:2004, 1993.
151. Tarttelin MF, et al: Serum free thyroxine levels respond inversely to changes in levels of dietary iodine
in the domestic cat. N Z Vet J 40:66, 1992.
152. Thoday KL, et al: Radioimmunoassay of serum total
thyroxine and triiodothyronine in cats: Assay methodology and effects of age, sex, breed, heredity, and
environment. J Small Anim Pract 25:457, 1984.
153. Thoday KL: Feline hypothyroidism: An experimental
study. Vet Dermatol NewsI12(1), 1989.
154. Thoday KL, Mooney CT: Historical, clinical and laboratory features of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Vet Rec 131:
257, 1992.
155. Thoday KL, Mooney CT: Medical management of
feline hyperthyroidism. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992, p 338.
156. Thorneloe C, et al: Evaluation de la thyroxine totale
par ELISA chez des chats normanx, hyperthyroYdiens

et euthyroYdiens souffrant de maladies systemiques.
Med Vet Quebec 27:119, 1997.
157. Torres SMF, et al: Hypothyroidism in a dog associated with trimethoprim-sulfadiazine therapy. Vet Dermatol 7:105, 1996.
158. Torres SMF, et al: Effect of oral administration of
prednisolone on thyroid function in dogs. Am J Vet
Res 52:416, 1991.
159. Vajner L: Lymphocytic thyroiditis in beagle dogs in a
breeding colony: Findings of serum autoantibodies.
Vet Med Czech 11:333, 1997.
160. Van Der Walt JA, et al: Functional endocrine modification of the thyroid following ovariectomy in the
canine. J S Afr Vet Assoc 54:225, 1983.
161. Wall JR, Kuroki T: Immunologic factors in thyroid
disease. Med Clin North Am 69:913, 1985.
162. Wartofsky L, Burman KD: Alterations in thyroid
function in patients with systemic illness: The "euthyroid sick syndrome." Endocrinol Rev 3:164, 1982.
163. Wheatley T, Edwards OM: Mild hypothyroidism and
oedema: Evidence for increased capillary permeability
to protein. Clin Endocrinol 18:627, 1983.
164. Williams DA, et al: Validation of an immunoassay for
canine thyroid stimulating hormone and changes in
serum concentration following induction of hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1730,
1996.
165. Yu AA, et al: Effect of endotoxin on hormonal responses to thyrotropin and thyrotropin-releasing hormone in dogs. Am J Vet Res 59:186, 1998.
166. Zeiss CJ, Waddle G: Hypothyroidism and atherosclerosis in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 17:1117, 1995.
167. Zerbe CA, et al: Thyroid profiles in healthy kittens
from birth to 12 weeks of age. Proc Annu Meet Am
Coli Vet Intern Med 16:702, 1998.

Adrenal Physiology and Disease
168. Angles JM, et al: Use of urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
versus adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation testing for monitoring mitotane treatment of pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 211:1002, 1997.
169. Barthez PY, et al: Ultrasonographic evaluation of the
adrenal glands in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:
1180, 1995.
170. Beale KM, Morris DO: Treatment of canine calcinosis cutis with dimethylsulfoxide gel. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
14:97, 1998.
171. Behrend EN, et al: Effect of storage conditions on
cortisol, total thyroxine, and free thyroxine concentrations in serum and plasma of dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 212:1564, 1998.
172. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ: Medical therapy of
canine Cushing's syndrome. Comp Cont Educ 20:679,
1998.
173. Bennett PF, Norman EJ: Mitotane (o,p'DDD) resistance in a dog with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and pheochromocytoma. Aust Vet J 76:101,
1998.
174. Bertoy EH, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of the
brain in dogs with recently diagnosed but untreated
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 206:651, 1995.
175. Bertoy EH, et al: One-year follow-up evaluation of
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in dogs with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 208:1268, 1996.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 879
176. Biewenga WJ, et aI: Persistent polyuria in two dogs
following adrenocorticolysis for pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Q 11:193, 1989.
177. B1axter AC, GruflYdd-Jones TJ: Concurrent diabetes
mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism in the dog: Diagnosis and management of eight cases. J Small Anim
Pract 31:117, 1990.
178. Boord M, Griffin C: Progesterone secreting adrenal
mass in a cat with clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:666, 1999.
179. Bruyette DS, et aI: L-deprenyl therapy of canine pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Poster, Am
Coli Vet Intern Med Forum, Washington DC, 1993.
180. Bruyette DS, et aI: Management of canine pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism with I-deprenyl (Anipryl). Vet Clin North Am 27:273, 1997.
181. Bruyette DS, et aI: Treating canine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism with I-deprenyl. Vet Med
92:711, 1997.
182. Bruyette DS: Anipryl versus Iysodren. Proc Am Coli
Vet Intern Med 16:525, 1998.
182a. Bruyette DS: An approach to diagnosing and treating feline hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Med 95:142,
2000.
183. Chastain CB, et aI: Evaluation of the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis in clinically stressed dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:435, 1986.
184. Chauvet AE, et aI: Effects of phenobarbital administration on results of serum biochemical analyses and
adrenocortical function tests in epileptic dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 207:1305, 1995.
185. Chrousos GP, et aI: Clinical applications of corticotropin-releasing factor. Ann Intern Med 102:344, 1985.
186. Church DB, et aI: Effect of nonadrenal illness, anaesthesia and surgery on plasma cortisol concentrations
in dogs. Res Vet Sci 56:129, 1994.
187. Daley CA, et aI: Use of metyrapone to treat pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat with large
cutaneous wounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:956,
1993.
188. den Hertog E, et aI: Results of nonselective adrenocorticolysis by o,p'-DDD in 129 dogs with pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 144:12, 1999.
189. Dow SW, et aI: Perianal adenomas and hypertestosteronemia in a spayed bitch with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1439,
1988.
190. Dow SW, et aI: Response of dogs with functional
pituitary maoroadenomas and macrocarcinomas to irradiation. J Small Anim Pract 31:287, 1990.
191. Duesberg CA, et aI: Adrenalectomy for treatment of
hyperadrenooorticism in cats: 10 cases (1900-1992).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1066, 1995.
192. Duesberg C, Peterson ME: Adrenal disorders of the
cat. Vet Clin North Am 27:321, 1997.
193. Duesberg CA, et aI: Magnetic resonance imaging for
diagnosis of pituitary macrotumors in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 206:657, 1995.
194. Dunn KJ, et aI: Use of ACTH stimulation tests to
monitor the treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 137:161, 1995.
195. Dunn KJ: Complications associated with the diagnosis
and management of canine hyperadrenocorticism. In
Practice 24:246, 1997.
196. Eichenbaum JD, et aI: Effect in large dogs of ophthalmic prednisolone acetate on adrenal gland and hepatic function. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:705, 1988.
197. Eiler H, et aI: Stages of hyperadrenocorticism: response of hyperadrenocorticoid dogs to the combined

dexamethasone suppressioniACTH stimulation test.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:289, 1984.
198. Emms SG, et aI: Adrenalectomy in the management
of canine hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
23:557, 1987.
199. Etreby MFE, et aI: Functional morphology of spontaneous hyperplastic and neoplastic lesions in the canine pituitary gland. Vet PathoI17:109, 1980.
200. Feldman EC: Evaluation of a combined dexamethasone suppressioniACTH stimulation test in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:49,
1985.
201. Feldman EC: Evaluation of a six-hour combined dexamethasone suppressioniACTH stimulation test in
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
189:1562, 1986.
202. Feldman EC, et aI: Comparison of mitotane treatment for adrenal tumor versus pituttary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:1642, 1992.
203. Feldman EC, Mack RE: Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio as a screening test for hyperadrenocorticism in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1637, 1992.
204. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Use of ketoconazole for
control of canine hyperadrenocorticism. In: Kirk RW,
Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992,
p 349.
205. Feldman EC, et aI: Plasma cortisol response to ketoconazole administration in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:71, 1990.
206. Feldman EC, et aI: Use of low- and high-dose dexamethasone tests for distinguishing pituitary-dependent
from adrenal tumor hyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:772, 1996.
207. Ferguson DC, Peterson ME: Serum free and total
iodothyronine concentrations in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Am J Vet Res 53:1636, 1992.
208. Ford SL, et aI: Hyperadrenocorticism caused by bilateral adrenocortical neoplasia in dogs. Four cases
(1983-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:789, 1993.
209. Frank LA, et aI: Comparison of cortisol concentrations after administration of cosyntropin at low and
high doses. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:99, 1999.
210. Frank LA, Oliver JW: Comparison of serum cortisol
concentrations in clinically normal dogs after administration of freshly reconstituted versus reconstituted
and stored frozen cosyntropin. J Am Vet Med Assoc
212:1569, 1998.
211. Frazier KS, et al: Multiple cutaneous metaplastic ossification associated with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism. J Vet Diagn Invest 10:303, 1998.
212. Gamier F, et aI: Adrenal cortical response in clinically normal dogs before and after adaptation to a
housing environment. Lab Anim 24:40, 1990.
213. Gayrard V, et aI: Interspecies variations of corticosteroid-binding globulin parameters. Domest Anim Endocrinol 13:35, 1996.
214. Glaze MR, et aI: Ophthalmic corticosteroid therapy:
Systemic effects in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
192:73, 1988.
215. Goossens MMC, et aI: Cobalt 60 irradiation of pituitary gland tumors in three cats with acromegaly.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:374, 1998.
216. Goossens MMC, et aI: Efficacy of cobalt 60 radiotherapy in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:374, 1998.

880 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
217. Goossens MMC, et al: Urinary excretion of glucocorticoids in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
cats. Domest Anim Endocrinol 12:355, 1995.
218. Greco OS, et al: Dexamethasone pharmacokinetics in
clinically normal dogs during low- and high-dose dexamethasone suppression testing. Am J Vet Res 54:
580, 1992.
219. Greco OS, et al: Pharmacokinetics of exogenous corticotropin in normal dogs, hospitalized dogs with nonadrenal illness and adrenopathic dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 21:369, 1998.
220. Greco OS, et al: Concurrent pituitary and adrenal
tumors in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism: 17 cases
(1978-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1349, 1999.
221. Greene CE, et al: Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in
a cat. Feline Pract 23:7, 1995.
222. Grooters AM, et al: Ultrasonographic characteristics
of the adrenal glands in dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism: Comparison with normal dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 10:110, 1996.
223. Guptill L, et al: Use of urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
to monitor treatment response in dogs with pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 210:1158, 1997.
224. Hansen BL, et al: Synthetic ACTH (cosyntropin)
stimulation tests in normal dogs: Comparison of intravenous and intramuscular administration. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 30:38, 1994.
225. Hegstad RL, et al: Effect of sample handling on adrenocorticotropin concentration measured in canine
plasma, using a commercially available radioimmunoassay kit. Am J Vet Res 51:1941, 1990.
226. Helton-Rhodes K, et al: Cutaneous manifestations of
feline hyperadrenocorticism. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 391.
227. Henry CJ, et al: Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio in
healthy and sick cats. J Vet Intern Med 10:123, 1996.
228. Hess RS, Ward CR: Concurrent canine hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus: Diagnosis and treatment. Comp Cont Educ 20:701, 1998.
229. Hess RS, et al: Association between hyperadrenocorticism and development of calcium-containing uroliths
in dogs with urolithiasis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:
1889,1998.
230. Hoerauf A, Reusch C: Ultrasonographic characteristics of both adrenal glands in 15 dogs with functional
adrenocortical tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:
193, 1999.
231. Horauf A, Reusch C: Darstellung der nebennieren
mittels Ultraschall: Untersuchungen bei gesunden
Hunden, Hunden mit nicht-endokrinen Erkrankungen
sowie mit Cushing-syndrom. Kleintier Praxis 40:351,
1995.
232. Huang H, et al: Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in
28 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:200, 1999.
233. Hurley KJ, Vaden SL: Evaluation of urine protein
content in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:369, 1998.
234. Hurley K, et al: The use of Trilostane for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. Proc Annu
Meet Am Coil Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
235. Jensen RB, DuFort RM: Hyperadrenocorticism in
dogs. Comp Cont Educ 13:615, 1991.
236. Jensen AL, et al: Evaluation of the urinary cortisol:
creatinine ratio in the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:99, 1997.
237. Jones CA, et al: Changes in adrenal cortisol secretion

as reflected in the urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio in
dogs. Dom Anim Endocrinol 7:559, 1990.
238. Jones CA, et al: Adrenocortical adenocarcinoma in a
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:59, 1992.
239. Kaplan AJ, et al: Effects of disease on the results of
diagnostic tests for use in detecting hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:445, 1995.
240. Kemppainen RJ, Zenoble RD: Nondexamethasonesuppressible, pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 187:276, 1985.
241. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Ovine corticotrophin-releasing
factor in dogs: Dose-response relationships and effects of dexamethasone. Acta Endocrinol 112:12,
1986.
242. Kemppainen RJ, Peterson ME: Circulating concentration of dexamethasone in healthy dogs, dogs with hyperadrenocorticism and dogs with nonadrenal illness
during dexamethasone suppression testing. Am J Vet
Res 54:1765, 1993.
243. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Plasma free cortisol concentrations in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Am J Vet
Res 52:682, 1991.
244. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Effects of single intravenously
administered doses of dexamethasone on response to
the adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 50:1914, 1989.
245. Kemppainen RJ, Peterson ME: Regulation of a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone secretion from the pars
intermedia of domestic cats. Am J Vet Res 60:245,
1999.
246. Kemppainen RJ, Boehrend E: Adrenal physiology.
Vet Clin North Am 27:173, 1997.
247. Kemppainen RJ, et al: Preservative effect of aprotinin
on canine plasma immunoreactive adrenocorticotropin
concentrations. Domest Anim Endocrinol 11:355,
1994.
248. Kerl ME, et al: Evaluation of a low-dose synthetic
adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation test in clinically normal dogs and dogs with naturally developing
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1497,
1999.
249. Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: Mitotane (o,p'-DDD)
treatment of 200 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 5:102, 1991.
250. Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: Mitotane treatment of 32
dogs with cortisol-secreting adrenocortical neoplasms.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:54, 1994.
251. Kipperman BS, et al: Diabetes mellitus and exocrine
pancreatic neoplasia in two cats with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:415, 1992.
252. Kipperman BS, et al: Pituitary tumor size, neurologic
signs, and relation to endocrine test results in dogs
with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: 43
cases (1980-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:762,
1992.
253. Kooistra HS, et al: Correlation between impairment
of glucocorticoid feedback and the size of the pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol 152:387, 1997.
254. LaRue MJ, Murtaugh RJ: Pulmonary thromboembolism in dogs: 47 cases (1986-1987). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 197:1368, 1990.
254a. Lusson 0, Billiemaz B: Un cas d'hypercorticisme
spontane chez un chat. Point Vet 31:57, 2000.
255. Mack RE, Feldman EC: Comparison of two low-dose
dexamethasone suppression protocols as screening
and discriminating tests in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1603, 1990.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 881
256. Mack RE, et aI: Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in
dogs. Comp Cont Educ 16:311, 1994.
257. Mackedanz R, Struckmann B: Bericht tiber einem
Fall von Hypercortisolismus bei einer Katze. Kleintier
Praxis 37:843, 1992.
258. Mauldin GN, Burk RL: The use of diagnostic computerized tomography and radiation therapy in canine
and feline hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
557, 1990.
259. Mbugua SW, et al: Adrenocortical suppression by a
glucocorticoid: Effect of a single I. M. injection of
betamethasone depot versus placebo given prior to
orthopaedic surgery in dogs. Acta Vet Scand 29:415,
1988.
260. Meij BP, et aI: Alterations in anterior pituitary function of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol 154:505, 1997.
261. Meij BP, et aI: Assessment of pituitary function after
trans sphenoidal hypophysectomy in beagle dogs. Domest Anim Endocrinol 14:81, 1997.
262. Meij BP, et aI: Residual pituitary function after
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol
155:531, 1997.
263. Meij BP, et aI: Results of transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in 52 dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Surg 27:246, 1998.
264. Meyer DJ, et aI: Effect of otic medications containing
glucocorticoids in liver function tests in healthy dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:743, 1990.
265. Moore GE, Hoenig M: Effect of orally administered
prednisone on glucose tolerance and insulin secretion
in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:126, 1993.
266. Moore GE, Hoenig M: Duration of pituitary and adrenocortical suppression after long-term administration of anti-inflammatory doses of prednisone in dogs.
Am J Vet Res 53:716, 1992.
267. Muller PB, et al: Effects of phenobarbital treatment
on adrenal function tests in dogs. Proc Annu Meet
Am Coli Vet Intern Med 16:700, 1998.
268. Murphy CJ, et al: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in a
dog caused by topical ophthalmic medication. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:640, 1990.
269. Nelson RW, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism in cats.
Seven cases (1978-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:
245, 1988.
270. Nelson RW, Feldman EC: Hyperadrenocorticism. In:
August JR (ed): Consultations in Feline Internal
Medicine. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1991,
p 267.
271. Nelson RW, et al: Pituitary macroadenomas and macroadenocarcinomas in dogs treated with mitotane for
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: 13 cases
(1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1612, 1989.
272. Nelson RW, et aI: Topics in the diagnosis and treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Comp Cont
Educ 13:1797, 1991.
273. Nichols R: Problems associated with medical therapy
of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
551, 1990.
274. Nichols R: Concurrent illness and complications associated with hyperadrenocorticism. Probl Vet Med 2:
565, 1990.
275. Norman EJ, et aI: Dynamic adrenal function testing
in eight dogs with hyperadrenocorticism associated
with adrenocortical neoplasia. Vet Rec 144:551, 1999.
276. Ortega TM, et al: Systemic arterial blood pressure
and urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with hyper-

adrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1724,
1996.
277. Penninek DG, et aI: Radiographic features of canine
hyperadrenocorticism caused by autonomously functioning adrenocortical tumors: 23 cases (1978-1986).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1604, 1988.
278. Peterson ME, et aI: Immunocytochemical study of
the hypophysis in 25 dogs with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. Acta Endocrinol 101:15, 1982.
279. Peterson ME, et aI: Adrenal function in the cat: comparison of the effects of cosyntropin (synthetic
ACTH) and corticotropin gel stimulation. Res Vet Sci
37:331, 1984.
280. Peterson ME: Canine hyperadrenocorticism. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 963.
281. Peterson ME, Steele P: Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:680,
1986.
282. Peterson ME, et aI: Plasma immunoreactive ACTH
peptides and cortisol in normal dogs and dogs with
Addison's disease and Cushing's syndrome: Basal concentrations. Endocrinology 119:720, 1986.
283. Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ: Dose-response relationship between plasma concentrations of corticotropin and cortisol after administration of incremental
doses of cosyntropin for corticotropin stimulation testing in cats. Am J Vet Res 54:300, 1983.
284. Peterson ME, Kemppainen RS: Comparison of immunoreactive plasma corticotropin and cortisol response to two synthetic corticotropin preparations (tetracosactrin and cosyntropin) in healthy cats. Am J
Vet Res 53:1752, 1992.
285. Peterson ME, et aI: Effects of synthetic ovine corticotropin-releasing hormone on plasma concentrations of
immunoreactive adrenocorticotropic, a-melanocytestimulating hormone and cortisol in dogs with naturally acquired adrenocortical insufficiency. Am J Vet
Res 53:1636, 1992.
286. Peterson ME, et al: Effect of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism in endogenous production and utilization of glucose in the dog. Dom Anim Endocrinol 3:
117, 1986,
287. Pinard SA, et al: Traitement de hypercorticisme spontane du chien par Ie ketoconazole: A propos de treize
cas, Prat Med Chirurg Anim Cie 30:319, 1995.
288. Poffenbarger EM, et aI: Gray-scale ultrasonography in
the diagnosis of adrenal neoplasia in dogs: Six cases
(1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:228, 1988.
289. Randolph JF, et aI: Use of urine cortisol-to-creatinine
ratio for monitoring dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism during induction treatment with
mitotane (o,p'-DDD). Am J Vet Res 59:258,1998.
290. Regnier A, Gamier F: Growth hormone responses to
growth hormone-releasing hormone and clonidine in
dogs with Cushing's syndrome. Res Vet Sci 58:169,
1995.
291. Reusch CE, Feldman EC: Canine hyperadrenocorticism due to adrenocortical neoplasia. J Vet Intern
Med 5:3, 1991.
292. Reusch CE, et aI: The efficacy of l-deprenyl in dogs
with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Vet
Intern Med 13:291, 1999.
293. Rijnberk A, Belshaw BE: An alternative protocol for
the medical management of canine pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Vet Rec 122:406, 1988.
294. Rijnberk AD, Belshaw BE: o,p'-DDD treatment of
canine hyperadrenocorticism- An alternative protocol.

882 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eels): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
1992, p 345.
295. Roberts SM, et al: Effect of ophthalmic prednisolone
acetate on the canine adrenal gland and hepatic function. Am J Vet Res 45:1711, 1984.
296. Robson M, et al: Adrenal gland function in the cat.
Comp Cont Ed 17:1205, 1995.
297. Rothuizen J, et al: GABAergic inhibition of the pituitary release of adrenocorticotropin and the rr-melanotropin is impaired in dogs with hepatic encephalopathy. Domest Anim Endocrinol 13:59, 1996.
298. Rothuizen J, et al: Aging and the hypothalamuspituitary-adrenocortical axis, with special reference to
the dog. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 125:73, 1991.
299. Ruehl WW, et al: Adrenal axis dysfunction in geriatric
dogs with cognitive dysfunction. Proc Annu Meet Am
Coll Vet Intern Med 15:119, 1997
300. Sarfaty D, et al: Neurologic, endocrinologic, and
pathologic findings associated with large pituitary tumors in dogs: Eight cases (1976-1984). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 193:854, 1988.
301. Scavelli TD, et al: Results of surgical treatment for
hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical neoplasia in the dog: 25 cases (1980-1984). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 189:1360, 1986.
302. Schaer M, Ginn PE: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
and steroid hepatopathy in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 35:48, 1999.
303. Scholten-Sloof BE, et al: Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a family of Dandie-Dinmont terriers. J EndocrinoI135:535, 1992.
304. Schulman J, Johnston SD: Hyperadrenocorticism in
two related Yorkshire terriers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
182:524, 1983.
305. Schwedes CS: Mitotane (o.p' -DDD) treatment in a
cat with hyperadrenocorticism. J Small Anim Pract
38:520, 1997.
306. Scott DW: Dermatologic use of glucocorticoids: Systemic and topical. Vet Clin North Am 12:19, 1982.
307. Scott DW, et al: Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in
the cat. Feline Pract 12:30, 1982.
308. Scott DW: Cutaneous pWebectasias in cushingoid
dogs. J Am Anim Hasp Assoc 21:351, 1985.
309. Simpson JW, van den Brock AHM: Assessment of fat
absorption in normal dogs and dogs with hyperadrenocorticalism. Res Vet Sci 48:38, 1990.
310. Smith MC, Feldman EC: Plasma endogenous ACTH
concentrations and plasma cortisol responses to synthetic ACTH and dexamethasone sodium phosphate
in healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 48:1719, 1987.
311. Solter PF, et al: Assessment of corticosteroid-induced
alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme as a screening test for
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
203:534, 1993.
312. Stolp R, et al: Results of cyproheptadine treatment in
dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
J Endocrinol 101:311, 1984.
313. Syakalima M, et al: The age dependent levels of serum ALP isoenzymes and the diagnostic significance
of corticosteroid-induced ALP during long-term glucocorticoid treatment. J Vet Med Sci 59:905, 1997.
314. Theon AP, Feldman EC: Megavolt irradiation of pituitary macrotumors in dogs with neurologic signs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:225, 1998.
315. Valentine RW, Silber A: Feline hyperadrenocorticism:
A rare case. Feline Pract 24:6, 1996.
316. Vandenbergh AGGD, et al: Haemorrhage from a ca-

nine adrenocortical tumour: A clinical emergency. Vet
Rec 131:539, 1992.
317. van den Brook AHM, Stafford WL: Epidermal and
hepatic glucocorticoid receptors in cats and dogs. Res
Vet Sci 52:312, 1992.
318. van Liew CH, et al: Comparison of results of adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation and low-dose dexamethasone suppression tests with necropsy findings in
dogs: 81 cases (1985-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:322, 1997.
319. van Sluijs FJ, et al: Results of adrenalectomy in 36
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism caused by adrenocortical tumour. Vet Q 17:113, 1995.
320. van Vonderen IK, et al: Influence of veterinary care
on the urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 12:431, 1998.
321. van Wijk PA, et al: Molecular screening for somatic
mutations in corticotropic adenomas of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Endocrinol
Invest 20:1, 1997.
322. van Wijk PA, et al: Effects of corticotropin-releasing
hormone, vasopressin and insulin-like growth factor-I
on proliferation of and adrenocorticotropic hormone
secretion by canine corticotropic adenoma. Eur J Endocrinol 138:309, 1998.
323. Vollset I, Jakobsen G: Feline endocrine alopecia-like
disease probably induced by medroxyprogesterone acetate. Feline Pract 16:16, 1986.
324. von Dehn BJ, et al: Pheochromocytoma and hyperadrenocorticism in dogs: Six cases (1982-1992). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 207:322, 1995.
325. Voorhout G, et al: Computed tomography in the diagnosis of canine hyperadrenocorticism not suppressible
by dexamethasone. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:641,
1988.
326. Voorhout G, et al: Nephrotomography and ultrasonography for the localization of hyperfunctioning adrenocortical tumors in dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:1280,
1990.
327. Voorhout G, et al: Assessment of survey radiography
and comparison with x-ray computed tomography for
detection of hyperfunctioning adrenocortical tumors
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1799, 1990.
328. Ward DA, et al: Band keratopathy associated with
hyperadrenocorticism in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 25:583, 1989.
329. Watson ADJ, et al: Systemic availability of o.p' -DDD
in normal dogs, fasted and fed, and in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism. Res Vet Sci 43:160, 1987.
330. Watson ADJ, et al: Plasma cortisol responses to three
corticotropic preparations in normal dogs. Aust Vet J
76:255, 1998.
331. Watson PJ, Herrtage ME: Hyperadrenocorticism in
six cats. J Small Anim Pract 39:175, 1998.
332. White SD: Facial dermatosis in four dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1441,
1986.
333. White SD, et al: Cutaneous markers of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Comp Cont Educ 11:446, 1989.
334. Widmer WR, Guptill, L: Imaging techniques for facilitating diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and
cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1857, 1995.
335. Willard MD, et al: Ketoconazole-induced changes in
selected canine hormone concentrations. Am J Vet
Res 47:2504, 1986.
336. Willard MD, et al: Effects of long-term administration of ketoconazole in cats. Am J Vet Res 47:2510,
1986.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 883
337. Willemse T, Mol JA: Comparison of in vivo and in
vitro corticotropin releasing hormone-stimulated release of proopiomelanocortin derived peptides in cats.
Am J Vet Res 55:1677, 1994.
338. Wilson SM, Feldman EC: Diagnostic value of the
steroid-induced isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase in
the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:245, 1992.
339. Yamini B, et aI: Ovarian steroid tumor resembling
luteoma associated with hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease) in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:57, 1997.
340. Young DW, Kemppainen RJ: Molecular forms of
B-endorphin in the canine pituitary gland. Am J Vet
Res 55:567, 1994.
341. Zenoble RD, Kemppainen RJ: Adrenocortical suppression by topically applied corticosteroids in healthy
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:685, 1987.
342. Zerbe CA, et aI: Hyperadrenocorticism in a cat. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 190:559, 1987.
343. Zerbe CA, et aI: Effect of nonadrenal illness on adrenal function in the cat. Am J Vet Res 48:451, 1987.
343a. Zerbe CA: The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
and pathophysiology of hyperadrenocorticism. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:1134, 1999.
343b. Zerbe CA: Screening tests to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism in cats and dogs. Compend Cont Educ
Pract Vet 22:17,2000.
343c. Zerbe CA: Differentiating tests to evaluate hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. Compend Cont Educ
Pract Vet 22:149, 2000.

Growth Hormone Physiology and Disease
344. Aribat T, et aI: Growth hormone response induced by
synthetic human growth hormone-releasing factor (144) in healthy dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 36:367,
1989.
345. Bell AG, et aI: Growth hormone responsive dermatosis in three dogs. N Z Vet J 41:195, 1993.
346. Bercu BB, Diamond FB: Growth hormone neurosecretory dysfunction. Clin Endocrinol Metab 15:537,
1986.
347. Bourdin M, et aI: Exploration functionnelle biochimique des troubles de la secretion de GH. Proc Gr
Etud Dermatol Anim Comp 7:20, 1991.
348. Comegliani L, Fabbrini F: Use of l-thyroxine and
medicated shampoo in three cases of canine pituitary
dwarfism. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford, 1998, p 483.
349. DeBowes LJ: Pituitary dwarfism in a German shepherd puppy. Comp Cont Educ 9:931, 1987.
350. Dicks P, et aI: The localization and characterization of
insulin-like growth factor-I receptors and the investigation of melatonin receptors on the hair follicles of
seasonal and nonseasonal fibre-producing goats. J Endocrinol 151:55, 1996.
351. Dubreuil P, et aI: Long-term growth hormone-releasing factor administration on growth hormone, insulinlike growth factor-I concentrations, and bone healing
in the beagle. Can J Vet Res 60:7, 1996.
352. Eigenmann JE, et aI: Panhypopituitarism caused by a
suprasellar tumor in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
19:377, 1983.
353. Eigenmann JE, et aI: Elevated growth hormone levels
and diabetes mellitus in a cat with acromegalic features. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:747, 1984.
354. Eigenmann JE: Disorders associated with growth hormone oversecretion: Diabetes mellitus and acromegaly. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
IX. W.E. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986, p 1006.

355. Eigenmann JE: Growth hormone-deficient disorders
associated with alopecia in the dog. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, 1986, p 1015.
356. Hamann F, et aI: Pituitary function and morphology
in two German shepherd dogs with congenital dwarfism. Vet Rec 144:644, 1999.
357. Klesty C, et aI: Ein ungewiihnlicher Fall von extremen Hautwuchserungen bei einer jungen Rauhhaardackel-hundin wahrend des Diiistrus ein Fall von Akromegalie? Kleintier Praxis 40:527, 1995.
358. Kooistra HS, et aI: Progestin-induced growth hormone (GH) production in the treatment of dogs with
congenital GH deficiency. Domest Anim Endocrinol
15:93, 1998.
359. Lothrop CD, Schmeitzel LP: Growth hormoneresponsive alopecia in dogs. Vet Med Rep 2:82, 1990.
360. Lund-Larsen TR, GrondaIen J: Ateliotic dwarfism in
the German shepherd dog: Low somatomedin activity
associated with apparently normal pituitary function
(two cases) and with panadenopitultary dysfunction
(one case). Acta Vet Scand 17:298, 1976.
361. Morrison WB, et aI: Orally administered clonidtne as
a secretagogue of growth hormone and as a thymotropic agent in dogs of various ages. Am J Vet Res
51:65, 1990.
362. Nixon AJ, et aI: Localization of insulin-like growth
factor receptors in the skin follicles of sheep (Ovis
aries) and changes during an induced growth cycle.
Comp Biochem Physiol A Physiol118:1247, 1997.
363. Ramsey IK, et aI: Concurrent central diabetes insipidus and panhypopituitarism in a German shepherd
dog. J SmaIl Anim Pract 40:271, 1999.
364. Randolph JF, et aI: Delayed growth in two German
shepherd dog littermates with normal serum concentrations of growth hormone, thyroxine, and cortisol.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:77, 1990.
365. Randolph JF, Peterson ME: Acromegaly (growth hormone excess) syndromes in dogs and cats. In: Kirk
RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1992,
p 322.
366. Randolph JF, Peterson ME: Growth hormone therapy
in the dog. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XIII. W.E. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 376.
367. Randolph JF: Personal communication, 1999.
368. Rijnberk A, et aI: Disturbed release of growth hormone in mature dogs: A comparison with congenital
growth hormone deficiency. Vet Rec 133:542, 1993.
369. Rosenkrantz W, Griffin CE: Lysodren therapy in suspect adrenal sex hormone dermatosis. Proc Annu
Meet WId Cong Vet Dennatol 2:121, 1992.
370. Roth JA, et aI: Thymic abnormalities and growth hormone deficiency in dogs. Am J Vet Res 41:1256,
1980.
371. Roth JA, et aI: Improvement in clinical condition and
thymus morphologic features associated with growth
hormone treatment of immunodeficient dwarf dogs.
Am J Vet Res 45:1151, 1984.
372. Schmeitzel LP, Lothrop CD: Hormonal abnormalities
in Pomeranians with normal coat and in Pomeranians
with growth hormone-responsive dermatosis, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 197:1333, 1990.
373. Schmeitzel LP, Parker W: Growth hormone and sex
hormone alopecia. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dennatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press,
New York, 1993, p 451.

884 • Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases
374. Schmeitzel LP, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasialike syndrome. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,1995.
375. Scott OW, Concannon PW: Gross and microscopic
changes in the skin of dogs with progestogen-induced
acromegaly and elevated growth hormone levels.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:523, 1983.
376. Scott OW, Walton OK: Hyposomatotropism in the
mature dog: A discussion of 22 cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 22:467, 1986.
377. Selman PJ, et al: Progestins and growth hormone
excess in the dog. Acta Endocrinol 125:42, 1991.
378. Selman PJ, et al: Progestin treatment in the dog 1.
Effects on growth hormone, insulin like growth factor
1 and glucose homeostasis. Eur J Endocrinol 131:413,
1994.
379. Selman PJ: Progestins and mammary growth hormone
production in the dog. Vet Q 19:539, 1997.
380. Shanley KJ, Miller WHo Adult-onset growth hormone
deficiency in sibling Airedale terriers. Comp Cont
Educ 9:1076, 1987.
381. Trotot V, et al: Effets des conditions de conservation
du sang total et du plasma de chien sur la concentration plasmatique en hormone de croissance. Rev Med
Vet 144:909, 1993.
382. van Garderen E, et al: Expression of growth hormone
in canine mammary tissue and mammary tumors: Evidence for a potential autocrine/paracrine stimulatory
loop. Am J PathoI150:1037, 1997.
383. Yokoyama S, et al: Case of growth hormone responsive dermatosis in a Pomeranian caused by o.p' -DOD
inhibition of adrenal cortical hormones. J Vet Med
51:27, 1998.

Sex Hormone Physiology and Disease
384. Allan FJ, et al: Endocrine alopecia in a miniature
poodle. N Z Vet J 43:110, 1995.
385. Ashley PF, et al: Effect of oral melatonin administration on sex hormone, prolactin, and thyroid hormone
concentration in adult dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
215:1111, 1999.
386. Barsanti JA, et al: Diethylstilbestrol-induced alopecia
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:63, 1983.
387. Bruinsma DL, Ackerman LA: Male pseudohermaphroditism in a Miniature Schnauzer. Vet Med Small
Anim Clin 78:1568, 1983.
388. Carlson RA: Endocrine alopecia in a dog showing
response to FSH administration. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 21:735, 1985.
389. Curtis CF, et al: Investigation of the reproductive and
growth hormone status of dogs affected by idiopathic
recurrent Hank alopecia. J Small Anim Pract 6:162,
1996.
390. Eigenmann JE: Estrogen-induced Hank alopecia in
the female dog: Evidence for local rather than systemic hyperestrogenism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:
621, 1984.
391. England GCW, et al: Evaluation of the testosterone
response to hCG and the identification of a presumed
anorchid dog. J Small Anim Pract 30:441, 1989.
392. England GCW: Ultasonographic diagnosis of nonpalpable Sertoli cell tumors in infertile dogs. J Small
Anim Pract 36:476, 1995.
393. Fadok VA, et al: Hyperprogesteronemia associated
with Sertoli cell tumor and alopecia in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 188:1058, 1986.
394. Fayrer-Hosken RA, et al: Follicular cystic ovaries and

cystic endometrial hyperplasia in a bitch. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 201:107, 1992.
395. Feldman SR: Androgen insensitivity syndrome (testicular feminization): A model for understanding steroid
hormone receptors. J Am Acad Dermatol 27:615,
1992.
396. Fiorito DA: Hyperestrogenism in bitches. Comp Cont
Educ 14:727, 1992.
397. Fourrier P, Lepesant V: Dysendocrinie sexuelle chez
un caniche male age de 5 ans. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 22:395, 1987.
398. Griffin C: Linear prepucial erythema. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 2:35, 1986.
399. Grossman CJ: Regulation of the immune system by
sex steroids. Endocrinol Rev 5:435, 1984.
400. Hammerling R, et al: Is there a role for estradiol in
the etiology of dermatoses in the male dog? Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet DermatollO:82, 1994.
401. Herrtage ME, Evans, H: The effect of progestogen
administration on insulin-like growth factor concentrations in two pituitary dwarfs. Proc Am Coli Vet Intern Med 16:702, 1998.
402. Hubert B, Olivry T: Dermatologie et hormones sexuelles chez les carnivores domestiques Ire partie:
physiopathologie. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:477,
1990.
403. Hubert B, Olivry T: Dermatologie et hormones sexuelles chez les carnivores domestiques 2e partie:
Etude clinique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:483,
1990.
404. Johnson GR, et al: Ultrasonographic features of testicular neoplasia in dogs: 16 cases (1980-1988). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 198:1779, 1991.
405. Ladds PW: The male genital system. In: Jubb KV, et
al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals, 4th ed, Vol
3. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p 471.
406. Laing EJ, et al: Spermatic cord torsion and Sertoli
cell tumor in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:879,
1983.
407. Lanore 0, et al: Metastase secretante d'un sertolinome. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 27:727, 1992.
408. Lecomte R: Hyperoestrogenisme spontane ou iatrogene et ses repercussions cliniques et hematologiques.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 24:73, 1989.
409. Leyva-Ocariz H: Effect of hyperadrenocorticism and
diabetes mellitus on serum progesterone concentrations during early metoestrus of pregnant and nonpregnant cycles induced by pregnant mares' serum
gonadotrophin in domestic dogs. J Reprod Fert Suppl
47:371, 1993.
410. Mann FA, et al: Serum testosterone and estradiol
17-B concentrations in 15 dogs with perineal hernia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1578, 1989.
411. Medleau L: Sex hormone-associated endocrine alopecias in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:689, 1989.
412. Miller WH Jr: Sex hormone-related dermatoses in
dogs. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy
X. W.B. Saunders Co., 1989, p 595.
413. Morris BJ: Fatal bone marrow snppression as a result
of Sertoli cell tumor. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:
1070, 1983.
414. Nemzek JA, et al: Cystic ovaries and hyperestrogenism in a canine female pseudohermaphrodite. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 28:402, 1992.
415. Nuttall T: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim Pract
39:509, 1998.

Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases • 885
416. Paradis M: Melatonin therapy for canine alopecia. In:
Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIII. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999, p 546.
417. Pluhar GE, et aI: Granulosa cell tumor in an ovariohysterectomized dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1063,
1995.
418. Schmeitzel LP, Lothrop CD: Sex hormones and skin
disease. Vet Med Rep 2:28, 1990.
419. Scott OW, Reimers TJ: Tail gland and perianal gland
hyperplasia associated with testicular neoplasia and
hypertestosteronemia in a dog. Canine Pract 13:15,
1986.
420. Suess RP, et aI: Bone marrow hypoplasia in a feminized dog with an interstitial cell tumor. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 200:1346, 1992.
421. Watson ADJ: Oestrogen-induced alopecia in a bitch.
J Small Anim Pract 26:17, 1985.
422. Weaver AD: Survey with follow-up of 67 dogs with
testicular Sertoli cell tumours. Vet Rec 113:105, 1983.

Miscellaneous
423. Bond R, et al: Metabolic epidermal necrosis in two
dogs with different underlying diseases. Vet Rec 136:
466, 1995.
424. Bruskiewicz KA, et aI: Diabetic ketosis and ketoacidosis in cats: 42 cases (1980-1995). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 211:188, 1997.
425. Bussieras J, et aI: Interet possible du minoxidil dans
Ie traitement de certaines alopecies canines. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 22:25, 1987.
426. Carny G: Alopecie endocrinienne associee a un diabete chez un chien. Point Vet 20:501, 1988.
427. Carpenter JL, et aI: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
viral papilloma on an eyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol 3:
1987, 1992.
428. Chastain CB, Graham CL: Xanthomatosis secondary
to diabetes mellitus in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
172:1209, 1978.
429. Denerolle PJ: Three cases of feline cutaneous xanthomas. Proc Wid Cong Vet Dermatol 2:84, 1992.
430. Foster AP, et aI: Recognizing canine hepatocutaneous
syndrome. Vet Med 92:1050, 1997.
431. Grieshaber TL, et al: Spontaneous cutaneous (eruptive) xanthomatosis in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:509, 1991.
432. Gross TE, et al: Glucagon-producing pancreatic endocrine tumors in two dogs with superficial necrolytic
dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1619, 1990.
433. Gross TL, et aI: Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (neerolytic migratory erythema) in dogs. Vet Pathol 30:75,
1993.
434. Haitjema H: Metabolic epidermal necrosis associated
with hepatopathy in a dog. Aust Vet Practit 25:20,
1995.
435. Harvey RG: The use of minoxidil (Loniten, Upjohn),
in selected cases of canine alopecia: A report of an
open trial. Vet Dermatol NewsI12:36, 1990.

436. Huntley AC: The cutaneous manifestations of diabetes mellitus. J Am Acad Dermatol 7:427, 1982.
437. Jones BR, et aI: Cutaneous xanthomata associated
with diabetes mellitus in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
26:33, 1985.
438. Jones BR, et aI: Inherited hyperchylomicronemia in
the cat. Feline Pract 16:7, 1986.
439. Kimura T, Doi K: The effect of topical minoxidil
treatment on hair follicular growth of neonatal hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:107, 1997.
440. Kwochka KW, Short BG: Cutaneous xanthomatosis
and diabetes mellitus following long-term therapy
with megestrol acetate in a cat. Comp Cont Educ 6:
185, 1984.
441. Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA: Neutrophil adherence and
movement in poorly and well-controlled diabetic
dogs. Am J Vet Res 45:1498, 1984.
442. McNeil PE: The underlying pathology of the hepatocutaneous syndrome: A report of 18 cases. In: Ihrke
PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 113.
443. Miller WH Jr, et aI: Necrolytic migratory erythema in
dogs: A hepatocutaneous syndrome. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 26:573, 1990.
444. Miller WH Jr, et al: Necrolytic migratory erythema in
a dog with a glucagon-secreting endocrine tumor. Vet
DermatoI2:179, 1991.
445. Nara T, et aI: Necrolytic migratory erythema in a
dog. J Vet Med Tokyo 49:464, 1996.
446. Niemand HG: Bildbericht. Kleintierpraxis 16:193,
1971.
447. Patel A, et aI: A case of metabolic epidermal necrosis
in a cat. Vet Dermatol 7:221, 1996.
448. Price VH (ed): Rogaine (topical minoxidil, 2%) in the
management of male pattern baldness and alopecia
areata. J Am Acad Dermatol 16(3 Part 2), 1987.
449. Power HT: What's up about the hepatocutaneous
syndrome? Dermatology Dialogue, Winter 1999, p 13.
450. Taboada J, Merchant SR: Superficial necrolytic dermatitis and the liver. Proc Am Coil Vet Intern Med
15:534, 1997.
451. Torres SMF, et aI: Resolution of superficial necrolytic
dermatitis following excision of a glucagon-secreting
pancreatic neoplasm in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:313, 1997.
452. Torres S, et aI: Superficial necrolytic dermatitis and a
pancreatic endocrine tumor in a dog. J Small Anim
Pract 38:246, 1997,
453. Vitale CB, et aI: Diet induced alterations in lipid
metabolism and associated cutaneous xanthoma formation in 5 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. ButterworthHeinemann, Oxford, 1998, p 243.
454. Walton OK, et al: Ulcerative dermatosis associated
with diabetes mellitus in the dog: A report of four
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:79, 1986.
455. Wilkinson JS: Spontaneous diabetes mellitus. Vet Rec
72:548, 1960.

Chapter

11
Acquired Alopecias

A

n acquired alopecia is a hair loss that develops sometime during the life of an
animal. The hereditary alopecias (see Chap. 12) and hair losses that develop as a
result of specific disease processes, such as dermatophytosis, endocrine abnormalities,
immunologic diseases, or self-inflicted hair loss from hypersensitivity or parasitism are
discussed elsewhere in this book. The conditions presented here include a potpourri of
acquired disorders characterized predominantly by noninflammatory alopecia. In most
instances, the etiopathogenesis of these disorders is poorly understood.

• CANINE ACQUIRED ALOPECIAS
Canine Pinnal Alopecia
Pinnal alopecia is most common in dachshunds but has also been observed in other
breeds, such as Chihuahuas, Boston terriers, Whippets, and Italian greyhounds. 43 The
pinnal alopecia is seldom noticed in animals less than 1 year of age. If it is, a genetic
alopecia is likely. At first, the haircoat is thinner and the hairs become smaller than
normal on the pinnae. Progressive diminution of the hairs makes the alopecia more
prevalent as the dog ages. With close observation, however, the clinician notes that very
small vellus hairs are still present (Fig. 11-lA). Uncommonly, the condition may progress
to total pinnal alopecia when the dog reaches 8 to 9 years of age. The remainder of the
dog's coat is normal. Diagnosis is facilitated by dermatopathologic examination, which
helps rule out other diseases. Changes similar to those of pattern baldness may be seen;
these changes include hair follicles that are often in anagen but are reduced in length and
diameter (miniaturized) (Fig. 11-2). No treatment is required, because this is a benign
problem. However, some owners may wish to try therapy. Melatonin is being tried for a
number of alopecia syndromes (see Chap. 3) and anecdotal reports suggest that it may be
helpful in this condition. 29• 3o Topical minoxidil was reported effective in stimulating hair
growth in genetically hairless dogs (see Chap. 12).21
It is important to differentiate such spontaneous alopecias from dermatoses that cause
hair loss on the pinnae. Hair follicle dysplasias, estrogen-responsive dermatosis, rare cases
of hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, dermatophytosis, and alopecia areata may also
cause pinnal alopecia. Topical steroid-induced alopecia may be seen on the convex surface
of the pinnae, even though the otic glucocorticoid-containing preparation may only be
applied to the concave surface of the pinnae or to the ear canal (Fig. 11-3). This has
been seen by the authors in dachshunds wherein it also aggravated the pinnal alopecia
present previously. However, these other differentials do not feature miniaturization of
hairs and hair follicles. Vasculitis or ischemic dermatitis can occur on the pinnae and
cause alopecia with severe erythema, scaling, crusting, and eventually, ulceration and
tissue loss at the pinnal margin. Other inflammatory diseases may cause alopecia and are
differentiated by the history of inflammation or previous pruritus.

887

888 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE II-I. A, Pinnal alopecia in a Dachshund. Note that the small vellus hairs are still present on folded
skin margins. B, Telogen defluxion. Postpartum shedding resulting from the physiologic stress of gestation and
lactation. C, Traction alopecia in a Maltese. Note the oval erythematous alopecic patch caused by a barrette used
to pull the hair snugly forward. D, Yorkshire terrier with short hair syndrome. This dog previously had long, silky
hair that reached the floor. E, Area of alopecia that persisted for 3% months in a Siberian husky before hair
growth occurred. F, Periodic alopecia of the pinnae of a Siamese cat. Hair will regrow spontaneously. The cause is
unknown. G, Preauricular feline alopecia. Note normal sparseness of hair between the eye and the ear. H, Feline
symmetric alopecia. Ventral view showing characteristic bilateral alopecia without skin reaction or lesions.

Acquired Alopecias • 889

FIGURE 11-2. Pinnal alopecia. Note marked
attenuation and miniaturization of hair follicle in
this biopsy specimen.

FIGURE 11-3. Pinnal alopecia in
a Dachshund that was aggravated by
the use of the topical glucocorticoid
containing the product clobetasoI.

890 • Acquired Alopecias

Pattern Baldness
Pattern baldness is most commonly seen in Dachshunds but may be seen in breeds such
as the Manchester terrier, miniature Doberman pinscher, and Chihuahua. 26 • 43 The cause
is unknown, but the alopecia is probably genetically determined (see Chap. 12).

Canine Follicular Dysplasia
There is a group of diseases characterized by coat changes, including alopecia, that are
referred to as follicular dysplasia." Color dilution alopecia is a well-documented hereditary
follicular dysplasia (see Chap. 12). Among certain breeds, including Siberian huskies, Irish
water spaniels, Portuguese water dogs, curly coated retriever, Boxer, Airedale terrier,
English and French bulldogs, and miniature Schnauzers, there is a marked predilection,
suggesting a genetic basis (see Chap. 12).14· 43 In addition, there are several endocrine
syndromes (adrenal sex hormone imbalances) that may also have abnormalities in follicular
receptors, indicating a component of the disease that may be considered a dysplasia.
These syndromes also have predisposed breeds, the Pomeranian, the Samoyed, and the
Chow Chow (see Chap. 10). Occasionally, nonpredisposed breeds also develop similar
findings. Therefore, follicular dysplasia should be considered in any case with these clinical
findings. The clinical findings in these dogs include poor, dry, frizzy haircoats; changes in
coat color; loss of primary hairs and retention of secondary hairs; development of curly or
twisted hairshafts; and varying degrees of alopecia. Some cases have presented for failure
to regrow their coat following clipping. These dogs were usually clipped because of a poor
or dull coat that the owner believed would improve with new growth after clipping. In
general, changes are most pronounced on the truncal part of the body; however, the neck
and proximal extremities are often involved as well.
Diagnosis is based on histopathologic examination. Different features may be seen in
the various breeds, suggesting that multiple abnormalities may be occurring and vary from
breed to breed or syndrome to syndrome. Histologic changes can include macromelanosomes, distortion of hairshafts or follicle shape, follicular hyperkeratosis, distorted anagen
hair bulbs, abnormal tricholemmal keratinization, and a predominance of catagen or
telogen follicles.lv 58 Treatment of these disorders has not been very successful, and most
reports are anecdotal. Synthetic retinoids, particularly etretinate, may be helpful in some
cases. 12. 13. 32 Melatonin, testosterone, and mitotane have been used in some cases. Testosterone and mitotane should be considered only when the clients insist, because the
disease is more benign than the therapy. Additionally, the adrenal or sex hormone abnormality should be documented, as described in Chapter 10.

Cyclic Follicular Dysplasia
Dogs occasionally develop a temporary pattern alopecia.f Typically, truncal alopecia or
marked thinning of the haircoat is present, but associated scaling and inflammation are
absent. Most commonly, lesions involve the trunk, especially the flank region. In some
cases, the problem is a seasonal one, with hair loss occurring primarily in the winter or
spring months. This kind of alopecia appears to be more of a problem in Alaska, where it
has been seen in Labrador retrievers, mixed breeds, Yorkshire terriers, and an Airedale
terrier", therefore, duration of light exposure may be important. Some dogs may experience only one or two episodes, whereas others develop some degree of alopecia every
year. In a sense, this condition may be considered an abnormal shedding pattern.

SEASONAL FLANK ALOPECIA
Seasonal flank alopecia is a more localized cyclic follicular dysplasia that also tends to
occur in the fall or spring. 4 . 14. 25. 42 Some dogs lose hair in the late fall and regrow it
spontaneously in the spring; others do the reverse and lose hair in the spring. Airedale
terriers, English bulldogs and Boxers are at higher risk, but the condition has been

Acquired Alopecias • 891

FIGURE 11-4. English bulldog
with recurrent seasonal flank alopecia (follicular dysplasia). Note alopecia and hyperpigmentation.

described in miniature Schnauzers, miniature Poodles, Doberman pinschers, Bouvier des
Flandres, Scottish terriers, Staffordshire terriers, French bulldogs, and Affenpinschers (see
Chap. 12).25,42,55,58 These dogs develop a nonscarring alopecia that is most often confined
to the thoracolumbar region (Fig, 11-4), The lesions are bilaterally symmetric, annular to
polycychc in shape, and have well-demarcated borders; in addition, the alopecic skin is
usually markedly hyperpigmented (Fig, 11-5), Scaling and bacterial folliculitis may occur
in the alopecic areas, In some dogs, only one side of the body is affected, or one side is
more severely affected than the other." An occasional dog will also develop alopecia and
hyperpigmentation on the bridge of the nose, The spontaneous regrowth of hair that
occurs in 3 to 4 months may consist of completely normal hair, or hair that is a different
color, texture, or both, In over half the cases, the hair loss occurs at least twice in
successive years." In the Affenpinschers reported with this condition, the hair loss only
occurred in the winter, when the dogs were kept in a conservatory without artificial light
or heat." To date, underlying causes, such as common endocrinopathies, have not been
identified, A study evaluating reproductive hormones and growth hormone response to
xylazine was normal except for an elevated post-adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-

FIGURE I 1-5. Close-up of the
dog in Figure 11-4, Note the generally well-circumscribed scalloped
margins of alopecia.

892 • Acquired Alopecias

stimulated progesterone, which was greater in the affected group during the minimum
photoperiod." The favorable response to melatonin therapy has led some to speculate on a
hormonal imbalance, possibly related to melatonin or prolactin, because these two hormones interact in an inverse relationship. Elevated prolactin stimulates shedding in
horses." Possibly, melatonin therapy inhibits prolactin release, which decreases the excessive shedding in these dogs.
Histologically, the fully developed lesions reveal follicular atrophy and infundibular
hyperkeratosis, which extends into the opening of secondary follicles and sebaceous ducts,
giving the appearance of a malformed foot. 25 Dysplastic follicles usually have an octopusor jelly fish-like appearance (Fig. 11-6A); the hyperkeratotic, distended infundibulum is
the body and the subjacent secondary follicles are the tentacles." Sebaceous glands are
melanized (see Fig. 11-6B). Because melanin-containing sebocytes undergo their normal
degenerative process, plugs of melanin are formed in sebaceous ducts and extruded as
casts into the distended hair follicle infundibulum.P
The prognosis is unpredictable in any given dog. Some dogs continue to develop
recurrent seasonal hair loss for years; other dogs have an occasional year when the
alopecia does not recur; still other dogs eventually develop permanent alopecia. 25• 42 About
20% of the dogs have only one episode of alopecia. The degree of alopecia is also
variable, with some dogs developing a virtually identical hair loss year after year and other
dogs developing larger areas of hair loss as years go by.25. 29 Treatment with subcutaneous
melatonin implants or injections was reported successful in 9 of 9 dogs with recurrent
flank alopecia.P: 29

FIGURE I 1-6. A. Seasonal Hank alopecia. Note the dysplastic, keratin-filled hair follicles with tentacular projections
into underlying dermis (octopus- or jelly fish-like appearance). Note also the melanin cast in the sebaceous duct (arrow).
B, Close-up of A. Note the fine Stippling of the sebaceous gland with melanin and the melanin cast within the associated
sebaceous duct.

Acquired Alopecias • 893
There were four Airedales, four Boxers, and one giant Schnauzer that had had
multiple recurrences of alopecia. Six of these dogs were treated with three 12-mg subcutaneous implants (total dose of 36 mg) of melatonin. Three were treated twice with 12.5-mg
subcutaneous injections of melatonin at 2-week intervals. At present, there are anecdotal
reports that oral melatonin is also efficacious, with a variety of doses being recommended.
The current recommendations are 3 to 6 mg PO q8 to 12h. 29

Anagen and Telogen Defluxion
In anagen defluxion, a special circumstance (e.g., antimitotic drugs, infectious diseases,
endocrine disorders, or metabolic diseases) interferes with anagen, resulting in abnormalities of the hair follicle and hair shaft. Hair loss occurs suddenly, within days of the insult,
as the growth phase continues (Fig. 11-7A and B).1O· 24. 43 In telogen defluxion, a stressful
circumstance (e.g., high fever, pregnancy, shock, severe illness, surgery, or anesthesia)
causes the abrupt, premature cessation of growth of many anagen hair follicles and the
synchronization of these hair follicles in catagen, then in telogen.!" 24, 43 Within 1 to 3
months of the initial insult, a large number of telogen hairs are shed as a new wave of
hair follicle cyclic activity begins (see Fig. 11-1B).
In humans, telogen defluxion has been proposed to have five functional types": (1)
immediate anagen release, the most common type, wherein anagen hair follicles prema-

FIGURE 11-7. A, Anagen defluxion in a kitten during the course of an
acute viral upper respiratory infection.
Note the widespread disheveled and
fractured appearance of the haircoat.
B, Hairs from a dog with anagen defluxion. Note the focal area of transient metabolic arrest and the structural defect that is susceptible to
fracture (arrow).

894 • Acquired Alopecias
turely enter telogen and hair loss begins within 3 to 5 weeks (e.g., drug effects; periods of
physiologic stress); (2) delayed anagen release, a common form, wherein follicles remain in
prolonged anagen and their "release" results in increased shedding in 2 to 3 months (e.g.,
postpartum hair loss); (3) short anagen, a very speculative form, wherein an idiopathic
shortening of anagen results in increased shedding and decreased hair length; (4) immediate telogen release, wherein normal telogen is shortened and hair loss begins in a few days
or weeks (e.g., drug effects, such as minoxidil), and (5) delayed telogen release, wherein
telogen is prolonged (e.g., irregularities in photoperiod).
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and direct hair examination.
Telogen hairs are characterized by a uniform shaft diameter and a slightly clubbed,
nonpigmented root end that lacks root sheaths (see Fig. 2-28B). Anagen defluxion hairs
are characterized by irregularities and dysplastic changes. The diameter of the shaft may
be irregularly narrowed and deformed, and breaking often occurs at such structurally
weakened sites, resulting in ragged points (see Fig. 2-28F). Skin biopsy is only rarely
helpful. When the alopecia due to telogen defluxion begins, histopathologic examination
shows only normal skin. In anagen defluxion, the characteristic changes are usually most
evident in the affected hairs, and these are usually lost when the skin is clipped for
biopsy, Typical histopathologic findings in anagen defluxion include apoptosis and fragmented cell nuclei in the keratinocytes of the hair matrix of anagen hair follicles, and
eosinophilic dysplastic hair shafts within the pilar canal."
Both anagen and telogen defluxion spontaneously resolve when the inciting factor is
relieved.
Excessive Shedding
Owners often ask 'Why does my dog (or cat) shed so much?" They are naturally concerned about large amounts of hair getting on their rugs, furniture, and clothing." The
shedding of hair is reported as the biggest disadvantage of pet ownership." When owners
perceive shedding hair as excessive, it compounds this feeling. If excessively shed hairs are
not associated with gross alopecia, the condition may cause inconvenience to the owner,
but it is probably normal or at least causes no problem for the animal. The hair growth
cycle is controlled by a number of factors (see Chap. 1), and the questions about shedding
are often difficult to answer. Very little information about it is available in the literature.
In the northern hemisphere, many outdoor dogs and cats shed to varying degrees in
spring and fall; indoor pets may shed all year long. When animals are shedding excessively, many hairs can be easily epilated, but areas of actual alopecia cannot be created. In
contrast, the clinician can usually create alopecia by gentle manual epilation in animals
with hair loss due to endocrine disorders and follicular dysplasias. When there is no
obvious clinical disease, modification of behavior, diet, or adjustment of light and temperature can be considered treatment. Hyperexcitable or nervous animals seem to shed more
excessively than their calm counterparts. Behavior modification programs or antianxiety
treatments may be beneficial. If no abnormal conditions can be discovered, the only
treatment is to remove the dead telogen hairs from the animal by combing, brushing, or
in some cases, vacuuming. Loshed (A.B.S.) is marketed in a spray, wipe-on sheet, and
shampoo formulation for dogs and cats. The spray and wipe-on formulations contain
keratin, amino acids, vitamins, essential unsaturated fatty acids, and herbal extracts, and
the manufacturer claims that regular use will reduce excessive shedding. Detailed studies
on its efficacy or mode of action are unavailable.

Traction Alopecia
Traction alopecia has been described in dogs that have had barrettes, rubber bands, or
other methods used to tie up their hair. 35 , 58 When these devices have been applied too
tightly or for too much time, alopecia may result. Initially, an inflammatory plaque may
occur, but it progresses to an atrophic scarred patch. Invariably, lesions are present on the
top or lateral aspects of the cranium. If the disease is allowed to progress too long, the
alopecia becomes permanent (see Fig. 11-IC).

Acquired Alopecias • 895

Diagnosis is based on the characteristic history and physical examination findings. In
the late stages, there are few differentials because of the atrophic nature and location of
the alopecia. Early lesions should be differentiated from alopecia areata, pseudopelade,
and dermatophytosis. Biopsy findings depend on the stage of the lesion that is sampled. 35 , 58 Early lesions may show variable mononuclear cell infiltrates, edema, and vasodilatation. Hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells and apoptosis of keratinocytes
may be seen. Chronic cases may be characterized by fibrosing dermatitis and scarring
alopecia or a "cell-poor" hydropic interface dermatosis with marked pilosebaceous atrophy
("faded" follicles).
Treatment consists of instructing the owner regarding proper placement of hairholding devices. Atrophic scars do not respond to medical therapy; if treatment is desired
for cosmetic purposes, surgical excision is required.

Trichorrhexis Nodosa
Trichorrhexis nodosa appears along the hair shaft as small, beaded swellings associated
with a loss of cuticle. 22, 56 The expanded areas are composed of frayed cortical fibers
through which the hair readily fractures. The basic cause is trauma, and a contributing
factor is inherent weakness of the hair shaft. Examples of physical trauma include excessive brushing, back combing, application of heat, and prolonged ultraviolet light exposure.
Sources of chemical trauma include bathing in excessively salty water or chlorinated
swimming pools, shampooing, and insecticidal or acaricidal dips.t" Trichorrhexis nodosa
has also been reported in association with amitriptyline therapy.s"
Clinical signs include multifocal or generalized hypotrichosis, wherein affected areas
show broken, stubby hairs (Fig. 11-8). A trichogram reveals hairs with nodular areas of
cortical splitting that resemble two brooms pushed together (see Fig. 11-19).
Treatment requires eliminating the source of physical or chemical trauma.

Medullary Trichomalacia
Medullary trichomalacia results in patchy alopecia, especially in German shepherd dogs
(see Chap. 12).54

Trichoptilosis
Trichoptilosis ("split ends") is a common hair shaft abnormality associated with the cumulative effects of chemical and physical trauma. A severe form, resulting in patchy alopecia,
has been described in Golden retrievers (see Chap. 12).46

FIGURE I 1-8. Trichorrhexis nodosa in a Greyhound associated with
amitriptyline therapy. Note broken
hairs and patchy alopecia. (Courtesy
C. TieghL)

896 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE 11-9. Topical steroidinduced erythema, hyperpigmentation, and flaccid bullae in groin of a
dog.

Injection Reactions
Injection reactions may induce focal areas of alopecia.t" Two types may be seen. In the
first, there is an inflammatory reaction that is usually either a panniculitis or a vasculitis.
Rabies vaccines (particularly those licensed for subcutaneous use) are most commonly
associated with the vasculitic type of reaction.P" 57, 58 In the second type, there is no gross
inflammation and the hair just falls out. There may be associated pigment changes and
dermal and epidermal atrophy. This form of reaction most commonly occurs with subcutaneous injections of glucocorticoid or progestational compounds.
Lesions are most commonly seen over the shoulders, back, and posterolateral thighs,
which are sites where injections are given. The inflammatory reactions initially present as
a circular to oval erythematous plaque. It is firm when palpated and may extend into the
deeper tissues. In some cases, the skin is not erythematous but just thickened and firm. In
other cases, there is an initial subcutaneous swelling (panniculitis). Chronically, the alopecic area becomes hyperpigmented and shiny, with or without mild scaling. The noninflammatory form presents as an atrophic, hypopigmented, oval-to-circular patch. With both
forms, the first signs of the lesions usually occur 2 to 4 months after an injection.
Diagnosis is based on the presence of typical lesions with a compatible history.
Differential diagnoses are dermatophytosis, folliculitis, cellulitis, demodicosis, alopecia
areata, pseudopelade, and localized scleroderma. Dermatopathologic examination is useful
for establishing the diagnosis and ruling out the other differentials. In the inflammatory
form, varying degrees of panniculitis are present, and lymphoid nodules are often prominent. 14• 58 Vasculitis mayor may not be evident. The overlying hair follicles are telogenized, atrophic, and occasionally, miniaturized. In the noninflammatory form, varying degrees of dermal and pilosebaceous atrophy are present.
Treatment is not usually required, although it may take months to over a year before
hair regrowth occurs. In some cases, the alopecia is permanent. When hair regrowth does
occur, the new hairs are often a different color. When hair growth does not recur, surgical
excision is effective. For the inflammatory form, intralesional or systemic glucocorticoids
may be beneficial. Pentoxifylline and dapsone have been used in the vasculitic form (see
Chap. 9).

Topical Glucocorticoid Reactions
Topical products containing potent glucocorticoids may cause focal alopecia. Concurrent
dermal atrophy, pyoderma, flaccid subepidermal bullae, comedones, or milia-like lesions
may also be present in some cases (Fig. 11_9).18 The most common history is the initial

Acquired Alopecias • 897

effective use of a topical glucocorticoid-containing product for the treatment of localized
pruritus or papular dermatitis. With time, the reaction to the topical starts to induce
lesions seen by the client, which are not attributed to the topical product. The topical
product is then used more frequently, for a prolonged period of time, and sometimes on
an increasingly larger area of skin. Lesions are most often seen on the groin or convex
base of the pinnae (see Fig. 11-3).

Short Hair Syndrome of Silky Breeds
Yorkshire terriers and silky terriers normally have long, silky hair coats. The luxurious coat
was achieved by many generations of selective breeding, and it is a source of great pride
to the pet's owner. Occasionally, an apparently normal-coated mature dog loses its coat,
and the coat is replaced with hairs that never grow to their former full length (see Fig.
11_1D).26,43 The owner is distressed by this and seeks help, often after unsuccessfully
trying vitamin and mineral supplements or coat conditioners containing fatty acids. The
affected dogs have no itching, erythema, or scaling of the skin. Onset occurs when the
dog is 1 to 5 years of age. There are no broken or bitten hairs. Because the long silky
hairs are gone, the remaining haircoat would be adequate for a mixed-breed dog or a
purebred dog with shorter hair. The condition also occurs in younger dogs. In such cases,
the puppy coat is normal, but it is replaced with a permanent shorter coat. The abnormal
new coat is apparent when the dog is 5 months of age. The hair on the head is of normal
length; however, the posterior abdominal area, hind legs, and chest have hairs that are
shorter than normal. There is no scaliness or inflammation of the skin.
It can only be theorized that the hair cycle has been shortened by some unknown
factor, such that the hairs are shed before they reach their normal full length. The most
important differential diagnoses are hair follicle dysplasias, endocrine (especially hypothyroidism) and genetic disorders, and psychogenic alopecia. There is no known treatment,

Postclipping Alopecia
Failure to regrow hair following clipping has been termed post-clipping alopecia or
follicular arrest. 14. 43 The hairs may not regrow for up to 24 months, but they usually
regrow within 1 year. Although this condition has been described as relatively common,
the authors consider it uncommon in their clinical experiences and discussion with groomers and surgeons. It is seen more often in breeds with long, thick coats, such as Siberian
huskies and Chow Chows, but it may occur in any dog (see Figs. 11-1E, 11-10, and 1111). The condition is most commonly seen following clipping for surgical procedures or
for the removal of mats. The clinical appearance is typical; in the affected areas, the coat
looks exactly as it did after it was clipped several months previously. The rest of the coat
is usually normal. It has been proposed that this syndrome may occur as the result of
vascular perfusion changes in response to cutaneous temperature changes." Another
possibility, however, is that these dogs are in their normal catagen stage of hair growth,
between losing and growing a new haircoat. This theory is supported by the discovery of
similar histologic changes in biopsies from normal-haired and affected areas 12; both can
show catagen arrest. Most of these dogs regrow hair in the clipped area after they go
through a heavy shedding or so-called blowing of their coat.P

Cicatricial Alopecia
A variety of diseases may result in a scarring alopecia. Once adnexal units are replaced by
scar tissue, hair loss becomes permanent.'? In addition to the scarring diseases, deep
physical, thermal, and chemical injury may result in scarring alopecia.

Chronic Radiant Heat Dermatitis
This syndrome, also referred to as erythema ab igne, was recently described in two dogs."
Erythema ab igne occurs in humans from prolonged and repetitive exposure to moderate

898 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE 11-10. Postclipping alopecia in an
Akita. Absence of hair regrowth at site of fracture
repair 13 months after surgery.

FIGURE I I-II. Postclipping alopecia in an English bulldog. Absence
of hair regrowth at site of intradermal skin testing 1 year later.

Acquired Alopecias • 899

heat and results in erythema and hyperpigmentation, In the two dogs reported, the major
findings were sharply marginated, irregular, asymmetric, alopecic patches. Variable degrees
of erythema, central hypopigmentation, peripheral hyperpigmentation, crusts, and ulceration were seen. The dorsolateral thorax was most affected. Both dogs would lay by
heating sources (infrared lamp, burning stove). Histopathology differs depending on the
stage biopsied. Acute lesions were characterized by epidermal atrophy, focal basal cell
vacuolation, and epithelial apoptosis, which may involve the adnexal epithelium. These
apoptotic cells had enlarged, irregular, hyperchromatic nuclei. Scarring alopecia remained
following removal of the source of the heat (see Chap. 16).

Follicular Lipidosis of Rottweilers
This recently recognized syndrome occurs in young Rottweilers of either sex. Although the
etiology is unknown, the exclusive occurrence in Rottweilers suggests genetic predisposition (see Chap. 12),17 All reported dogs and most seen by the authors were younger than
1 year of age. Hypotrichosis of the red-colored points is seen. The degree of alopecia may
vary, and black hairs within the affected areas may be spared (Fig. 11-12). One reported
case had concurrent thyroid atrophy and chronic renal disease. One author (CEG) has
seen five cases, two of which also tested low on thyroid screens, but thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) response tests were not done. In all dogs followed, the disease improves
or completely resolves clinically. Histopathology of affected skin shows hair matrix cells to
be swollen and vacuolated (Fig. 11-13). Special stains and electron microscopy revealed
lipid within the vacuoles (see Chap. 12),17

Alopecia Mucinosa
A lO-year-old Labrador retriever was reported with an 11-month history of progressive
alopecia that started on the head and progressed to involve the limbs and patches on the
trunk. 2 Periodic patchy hair growth would occur intermittently. Generalized scaling was
also noted. A normocytic normochromic anemia, hyperglobulinemia and positive antinuclear antibody test (ANA > 1:32) were present. A total serum thyroxine was normal.
Histopathology revealed orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, acanthosis, hydropic degeneration
of basal cells, sparse apoptosis of keratinocytes, pigmentary incontinence, and mononuclear perivascular dermatitis. The striking changes were perifollicular lymphohistiocytic
inflammation with infiltration of lymphocytes into the follicular and sebaceous epithelium,
epithelial degeneration, and cystic spaces within the follicular epithelium. These spaces
stained positive for mucin.

FIGURE I 1-12. Rottweiler with
follicular lipidosis; note the thinning
alopecia of the red-haired areas and
the unaffected black hair on the
face.

900 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE I 1- 13. Follicular lipidosis. Note the vacuolar changes of
the hair bulbs.

• FELINE ACQUIRED ALOPECIAS
Feline Pinnal Alopecia
Some Siamese cats develop a spontaneous periodic alopecia of the ears (see Fig. 11IF),40 Lesions are typically present on both pinnae. The alopecia may be patchy or involve
most of the pinnal surface, and the affected skin is clinically normal. After several months,
the hair regrows without treatment. The cause is unknown.'? Histopathologic findings have
not been reported.

Feline Preauricular Alopecia
The temporal region between the ear and eye of cats is more sparsely haired than are
other parts of the head (see Fig. ll-lG).40 This is a physiologic, not a pathologic,
condition.v' In long-haired or densely coated cats, this area is not noticeable; however, in
cats with short or less dense haircoats, it can look like alopecia. When cat owners ask their
veterinarians about the condition, they can be told that the condition is normal and
neither requires nor would respond to treatment. In typical cases, skin scrapings, fungal
cultures, and biopsies are totally unnecessary. If inflammation, excessive scale, or follicular
casts are present, diagnostic tests for other diseases should be considered.

Feline Acquired Symmetric Alopecia
Feline acquired symmetric alopecia (formerly feline endocrine alopecia) is a rare acquired
bilaterally symmetric hypotrichosis of unknown origin. 24. 39. 51

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The exact cause and pathogenesis of feline acquired symmetric alopecia are unknown. The
original name of feline endocrine alopecia was changed because no true endocrine cause
had been proved." However, there has been a study that suggests there may be abnormal
thyroid function, and 73% of affected cats responded to liothyronine (T3 ) therapy.P" 52
One theory suggested that these cats may have had a decreased thyroid reserve. The
results were based on basal changes in group averages. Individual cases can have normal
total thyroxine (TT4) or TT 3 levels or a normal response to TSH. However, as groups,
these cats had a depressed response to TSH:52 It has also been observed that an identical

Acquired Alopecias • 90 I

pattern of alopecia can be self-inflicted. Because cats are sometimes secret groomers, the
owners may not be aware that they are licking or pulling excessively at the hairs. Hair
regrowth that occurs with gonadal or thyroid hormones in these cats may be due to
psychologic or other changes not related to treatment of a true deficiency. In this syndrome, placement of an Elizabethan collar or bucket on the eat's head for several weeks
will demonstrate whether the alopecia was self-inflicted. If hair regrowth does not occur,
traumatic causes can be excluded and this syndrome should then be considered. When
hair does not regrow, demodicosis, hyperglucocorticoidism, hyperprogesteronism, and
paraneoplastic alopecia should be considered.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Feline acquired symmetric alopecia is a rare disease seen mostly in neutered male and
female cats. No breed predilection has been reported, but purebred cats are rarely
affected. The age of affected cats ranges from 2 to 12 years, with an average of 6 years.
Feline acquired symmetric alopecia is characterized by bilaterally symmetric hypotrichosis, which begins in the genital and perineal regions (see Fig. 11-IH). Diffuse thinning of the hair, rather than complete baldness, affects the anogenital region, proximal
tail, caudomedial thighs, and ventral abdomen. Long-standing cases may have hypotrichosis of the lateral thorax and flanks, but the dorsum is spared. Hairs in the affected
areas are easily epilated. Pruritus and skin lesions are usually absent.

DIAGNOSIS
The first diagnostic question is whether the cat has bitten or licked the hairs, and thereby
caused the alopecia, or the hairs have fallen out by themselves. Close examination by
rolling the skin reveals normal numbers of hairs in cats that lick off the hair. A trichogram
helps because the distal hair tips are intact and pointed, and the proximal (bulbar) ends
are telogenized in this syndrome. If the distal end of the hair shows a broken or chewed
off edge, the cat is creating the hair loss. It must be emphasized here that most cats with
a symmetric alopecia that appears noninflammatory are causing it by licking and chewing
and do not have acquired symmetric alopecia.v
The differential diagnosis includes the pruritic causes of alopecia such as flea bite
hypersensitivity, atopy, food hypersensitivity, dermatophytosis, feline demodicosis (rare),
and ectoparasites such as Otodectes cynotis and Cheyletiella blakei. Nonpruritic causes of
alopecia include hypothyroidism (extremely rare), hyperglucocorticoidism (rare), hyperprogesteronism (extremely rare), paraneoplastic alopecia (rare), excessive shedding, trichorrhexis nodosa, telogen and anagen defluxion (rare), and psychogenic alopecia (rare). Lymphocytic and plasmacytic gastroenteritis has also been associated with symmetric alopecia
of the cervical or inguinal region in 28.6% of the cases. It was suggested that this
condition could have been a type of food hypersensitivity, but no pruritus or description
of short stubby hairs was reported. Two of four affected cats resolved their alopecia as the
gastroenteritis improved with prednisone and diet change." Definitive diagnosis is based
on history, physical examination, results of laboratory studies, and response to therapy.
Hemogram, serum chemistries, urinalysis, and tests of thyroid and adrenal function are
normal. Skin biopsy reveals telogenization of hair follicles.v- ,58

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The client should be counseled about the benign nature of this condition and informed
that treatment may not be necessary. If treatment is elected, T 3 should be tried initially.
T 3-initially given orally at 20 JLglcat ql2h, then slowly increased to 50 JLglcat-should
be administered for 12 weeks.P' The most significant side effects to consider are cardiac
arrhythmias, including premature ventricular beats.
Alternatively, combined androgen-estrogen therapy appears to be more effective than
either sex hormone alone.'? Excellent results have been obtained with intramuscular

902 • Acquired Alopecias
injections of repositol testosterone (12.5 mg/cat) and repositol diethylstilbestrol (0.625 mg/
cat). If diethylstilbestrol is unavailable, one can use estradiol (0.5 mg/cat). The cats are reexamined in 6 weeks, and if new hair growth is not evident, a second injection is given.
Relapse occurs after a variable period of time (6 months to 2 years) in about 50% of the
cats, and retreatment is usually effective. The occasional transient side effects that are
seen with androgen-estrogen therapy are signs of estrus in females and aggressiveness,
urine spraying, or both in males. These signs are seen during the first week of therapy.
Overdose of either testosterone or estrogen can result in severe hepatobiliary disease and
death. Repositol testosterone, repositol diethylstilbestrol, and repositol estradiol are not
licensed for use in cats in the United States.
Progestational compounds are also effective for the treatment of feline acquired
symmetric alopecia.'? Repositol progesterone (2.2 to 22 mg/kg) or medroxyprogesterone
acetate (50 to 175 mg/cat) may be administered intramuscularly or subcutaneously. The
cats are re-examined in 6 weeks, and a second injection is given if hair regrowth is not
evident. Megestrol acetate may be given orally (2.5 to 5 mg/cat), once every other day,
until hair growth is evident. A maintenance dose of 2.5 to 5 mg/cat, once every 1 to 2
weeks, is usually required. Because potential side effects of progestational compounds in
the cat are numerous and occasionally severe, the previously mentioned treatments or no
treatments are recommended (see Chap. 3). Progestational compounds are not licensed
for use in cats in the United States. Interestingly, they can produce feline symmetric
alopecia-like hair loss.

Injection Reactions
Cats may also react to various subcutaneous injections, although less frequently." Rabies
reactions similar to those in dogs have been described." Praziquantel (Droncit) has been
incriminated in multiple cases. Besides the inflammatory alopecic form, a pruritic ulcerative form may also occur. These reactions can be very difficult to manage, and the cats
often develop secondary infections. Because most of these lesions occur in the dorsocervical or shoulder region, the major differential diagnoses are feline ulcerative linear fibrosing dermatitis (see Chap. 18) and food hypersensitivity. Chronic vaccine reactions have
been incriminated as a cause of neoplasia, especially fibrosarcomas, in the cat (see Chap.
20).

Topical Glucocorticoid Reactions
Focal alopecia has been seen in cats as a local reaction to topical glucocorticoid-containing
products. The pinnae or base of the pinnae has most commonly been affected from the
use of otic products (Fig. 11-14).

Paraneoplastic Alopecia
This syndrome has been seen in old cats that present with a 2-week to 5-month history of
inappetence, lethargy, weight loss, and progressive alopecia.'- 20. 31 The alopecia begins
acutely and involves the ventrum and the legs. Less frequently, alopecia may be seen on
the pinnal and periocular areas. Focal areas of erythema and scaling may be present. Hair
may be easily epilated from all over the body. Some cats appear to groom excessively,
which, in combination with the hypokeratosis seen histologically, may account for the
smooth, glistening appearance of the alopecic skin (Fig. 11-15). The footpads may be
affected, becoming shiny, smooth, soft, and occasionally, crusted and fissured (Fig. 1116). In some cats, the pads are painful and the cats are reluctant to walk. A black, waxy
material may accumulate in the clawbeds. In one cat, there was an associated Malassezia
dermatitis. 11
Hematologic and biochemical results are not indicative of underlying neoplasia, Skin
biopsy reveals telogenization, marked atrophy, and miniaturization of hair follicles (Fig.
11-17). Focal areas of epidermal hyperplasia and alternating orthokeratotic and parakera-

Acquired Alopecias • 903

FIGURE 11-14. Pinnal alopecia
in a cat from topical glucocorticoid
application.

totic hyperkeratosis are present. Areas of hypokeratosis are prominent. A mild superficial
lymphocytic perivascular infiltrate is present in the dermis. Adnexal atrophy may be
severe. Radiographic and ultrasonographic studies usually fail to reveal an abdominal mass.
The diagnosis is usually made during exploratory laparotomy. Most cats have had a
pancreatic carcinoma of either acinar cell or pancreatic duct origin. 3• 3 1 Two cats had a bile
duct adenocaroinoma.lv "
Generally, the prognosis is grave because metastasis to the liver or lungs has usually
occurred by the time a diagnosis is made, although early surgical intervention may be
curative. One case was reported that was treated with surgical excision of a pancreatic
carcinoma that was confined to the left limb of the pancreas. This cat recovered and, 10
weeks following surgery, was doing well and regrowing hair. 20 In another cat,50 left
pancreatectomy resulted in complete hair regrowth within 10 weeks. However, although
no evidence of metastasis was seen at the time of surgery (including biopsies of liver and
lymph nodes), the alopecia recurred 18 weeks later, and metastasis was confirmed at
necropsy. These cases substantiate the relationship between the neoplasia and dermatological disease.

s.

FIGURE 11-1
Paraneoplastic
alopecia in a cat. Note the glistening
appearance of the skin. (Courtesy
Dr. B. Atlee.)

904 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE I 1-16. Paraneoplastic
alopecia in a cat. Footpad is thin,
shiny, and focally crusted.

FIGURE 11-17. Paraneoplastic alopecia in a
cat. Note marked attenuation and miniaturization
of hair follicles. (Courtesy R. Dunstan.)

Acquired Alopecias • 90S

Exfoliative Dermatitis and Thymoma
Exfoliative dermatitis is another example of a dermatosis being a marker for internal
neoplasia.r' Older cats are affected initially with a nonpruritic, scaling dermatitis of the
head and pinnae. The early scaling tends to be fine, white, and nonadherent. In more
chronic cases, the scales become larger and present on the skin as well as trapped within
the hair coat. This condition progresses to involve most of the body, and alopecia develops. Initially, erythema is mild, but may become more pronounced in chronic cases.
Brownish, waxy deposits accumulate around the lips, eyes, and in the ear canals and
clawbeds. The cats develop the skin disease as the initial sign without evidence of the
underlying neoplasia, which has usually been found at post mortem. Histopathology shows
a cell-poor hydropic interface dermatitis. Radiology reveals a mediastinal mass that histologically appears as a thymoma. Surgical removal of the thymoma in early cases reverses
the symptoms (see Chap. 14).

Follicular Dysplasia
A form of follicular dysplasia was reported in a Cornish rex cat (see Chap. 12).45 Some
alopecia of the tail and dorsal lumbar area had been present at birth, but at 10 months of
age, the condition progressed to symmetric truncal alopecia, Hair examination revealed
melanin clumping that distorted hair shaft anatomy. Hair examination of a variety of other
normal cats revealed that blue and cream-colored normal cats had smaller melanin
clumps that did not distort hair shaft anatomy (associated with Maltese dilution gene) (see
Chap. 12).

Trichorrhexis Nodosa
This condition has been recognized in cats due to excessive trauma of the hair (Figs. 1118 and 11-19A and B). Acquired trichorrhexis nodosa was reported in a cat in association
with chronic use of a flea shampoo." Another acquired form of trichorrhexis nodosa was
reported in a 2-year-old cat.' Symmetric diffuse alopecia that spared only the head and
extremities was seen in a cat with flea allergy that also had whitish nodes on some hair
shafts in the alopecic area. The nodes were associated with hair shaft swellings that, on
light microscopic trichogram and scanning electron microscopy, were associated with
cuticular damage and splaying of cortical cells. The pathologic findings of the nodes were
consistent with trichorrhexis nodosa. It was postulated that this case represented an

FIGURE 11- 18. Trichorrhexis
nodosa associated with chronic use
of flea shampoo on a cat. Note the
generalized hypotrichosis and broken
hairs of varying lengths.

906 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE 11-19. A, Trichorrhexis
nodosa. Hair from the cat in Figure
11-18. Note the nodular area in the
center of the hair shaft, where breakage will occur. B, Trichorrhexis nodosa. Hair from the cat in Figure
11-18. This hair has fractured at a
nodule, giving the appearance of two
brooms end to end.

Acquired Alopecias • 907

acquired form of the disease secondary to excessive trauma associated with excessive
grooming from fleas and possibly a hair keratin defect to explain the uncommon fragility
of the hairs in this cat. Discontinuation of the flea shampoo or treatment of the flea bite
hypersensitivity cured these two cats.

Idiopathic Lymphocytic Mural Folliculitis
Mural folliculitis is a reaction pattern that is characterized by inflammation that targets the
hair follicle outer root sheath epithelium. 6, 14-16,58 This reaction pattern may be seen with
a variety of diseases, including dermatophytosis, demodicosis, early prodromal epitheliotropic T-cell lymphoma (see Fig. 11-24A), pseudopelade, sebaceous adenitis, food hypersensitivity, and drug reaction.l- 14-16, 27, 33, 58 In one severe form of mucinous degenerative mural folliculitis there may be an association with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
infection, high-dose glucocorticoid therapy, epitheliotropic lymphoma, severe illness, and
debilitation (Fig. 11-20). Pseudopelade is believed to have an immune-mediated etiology
and is discussed in Chapter 9. Mural folliculitis as a manifestation of cutaneous adverse
drug reaction (see Chap. 9) and sebaceous adenitis (see Chap. 18) are discussed elsewhere.

FIGURE 11-20. A, Facial alopecia in a cat with mucinous degenerative mural folliculitis. B, Close-up
view of the trunk showing alopecia
and scaling, (Courtesy Dr. T. Olivry.)

908 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE 11-21. Idiopathic feline
lymphocytic mural folliculitis. Annular area of alopecia and fine scaling
over shoulder.

Idiopathic forms of lymphocytic mural folliculitis have been described." 14-16. 27. 34
Idiopathic cases have been described in middle-aged to old cats, and may have one or
more well-circumscribed, annular areas of alopecia (Fig. 11-21) or a diffuse partial
alopecia (Fig. 11-22). Scaling is variable. The head, limbs, and trunk are most commonly
involved. Pruritus is variable.
Although lymphocytic mural folliculitis is a reaction pattern seen in a number of
feline dermatoses, careful histologic studies may allow separation of specific syndromes in
the future. The presence of fungal elements or mites will, of course, document these
diagnoses. Fungal elements may be quite sparse in cats with dermatophytosis and this
reaction pattern. Fungal culture by a brush technique may be required. In cats with
pseudopelade, the lymphocytic infiltrate targets the isthmus of the hair follicle, with
sebaceous glands being spared early but often infiltrated or obliterated late in the disease.
In sebaceous adenitis, the sebaceous glands are targeted, but the hair follicle isthmus and
infundibulum may be less intensely infiltrated. Early or prodromal epitheliotropic lymphoma may require sequential biopsies over many months before it can be reliably
differentiated from a non-neoplastic lymphocytic mural folliculitis." Severely inflammatory

FIGURE 11-22. Idiopathic feline
lymphocytic
mural
folliculitis.
Marked exfoliation over trunk.
(Courtesy J. Guillot.)

Acquired Alopecias • 909

lymphocytic mural folliculitides-associated with histiocytes, fewer eosinophils and neutrophils, follicular mucinosis, and follicular destruction - may be associated with FIV
infection or epttheliotropic lymphoma.sP' Cats with idiopathic lymphocytic mural folliculitis and those with drug-induced or food-induced forms have the hair follicle infundibulum
targeted (Fig. 11-23). Cats with drug- or food-induced reaction also seem to have a
concurrent hydropic interface dermatitis and folliculitis (Fig. 11-24B).
Reports of therapeutic responses are anecdotal and confusing. Part of the confusion
undoubtedly is generated by the failure to recognize that this follicular reaction pattern
has numerous etiologies. Idiopathic cases have responded, and failed to respond, to
glucocorticoids or systemic retinoids.sP' The authors and others6 , 6a have seen some cases
resolve on a novel protein diet and relapse with dietary challenge. Other cases have
resolved when concurrent drug therapy was discontinued. Still other cases have been
reported to spontaneously resolve.P'

Alopecia Mucinosa
In humans, alopecia mucinosa (follicular mucinosis) is characterized by well-demarcated
areas of alopecia, fine scaling, and prominent hair follicle orifices, with or without slightly
raised and mildly erythematous papules or plaques.f There are three clinical patterns.
The first and most common is seen in young adults; it is restricted to the head and neck,

FIGURE 11-23. Idiopathic lymphocytic mural
folliculitis in a cat. Entire infundibulum of hair
follicle is infiltrated by lymphocytes.

91 0 • Acquired Alopecias

FIGURE 11-24. A, Early epitheliotropic lymphoma in a cat. Note
mural and perifollicular infiltration of
neoplastic lymphocytes. B. Adverse
cutaneous reaction to food. In addition to interface folliculitis, the epidermal interface (top left) is similarly
involved.

FIGURE 11-25. Feline alopecia
mucinosa. Alopecia and scaling of head,
neck, and front legs. (Courtesy V. Studdert.)

Acquired Alopecias • 91 1

FIGURE 11-26. Feline alopecia mucinosa. A, Epidermal mucin appears as clear vacuolar areas and
exaggerated intercellular spaces in H & E-stained sections. B, Epidermal vacuoles and intercellular spaces are
filled with mucin and alcian blue-stained section.

and it resolves in about 2 years. The second form is seen in a shghtly older age group,
and lesions are more generalized and resolution takes longer. The third form is seen in
aged people, and plaques of mycosis fungoides eventually develop within the areas of
alopecia. The pathogenic mechanism of alopecia mucinosa is unknown.
Alopecia mucinosa was recognized in two adult cats with asymptomatic, well-demarcated alopecia and fine scaling on the head, ears, and neck (Fig. 11-25).41 Biopsy
specimens initially revealed mucinosis of the epidermis and the hair follicle's outer root
sheath (Fig. 11-26). Several months later, both cats had plaques in the areas of alopecia.
Biopsy results at this time were typical of epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides).
Both cats were lost to follow-up .

• REFERENCES
1. Alhaidari Z, et al: Acquired feline hair shaft abnormality resembling trichorrhexis nodosa in humans. Vet
Dermatol 7:235, 1996.
la. Barrs VR, et al: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim
Pract 40:559, 1999.
2. Bell A, Oliver F: Alopecia mucinosa (follicular mucinosis) in a dog. Vet Dermatol 6:221, 1995.
3. Brooks DC, et al: Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia in
3 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:557, 1994.
4. Cieslowski D, Paradis M: Alopecie saisonniere canine.
Med Vet Quebec 24:98, 1993.
5. Curtis CF, et al: Investigation of the reproductive and
growth hormone status of dogs affected by idiopathic

recurrent flank alopecia. J Small Anim Pract 37:417,
1996.
6. Declercq J: Lymphocytic mural folliculitis in two cats.
Vlaams Diergeneeskd Tijdschr 64:177, 1995.
6a. Declercq J: A case of diet-related lymphocytic mural
folliculitis in a cat. Vet Dermatolll:75, 2000.
7. Declercq J, Vanstapel MJ: Chronic radiant heat dermatitis (Erythema ab igne) in two dogs. Vet Dermatol 9:
269,1998.
8. Dennis JS, et al: Lymphocytic/plasmacytic gastroenteritis in cats: 14 cases (1985-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc
200:1712, 1992.
9. Endenburg N, Knol BW: Behavioural, household, and

912 • Acquired Alopecias
social problems associated with companion animals:
opinions of owners and nonowners. Vet Quart 16:130,
1994.
10. Fadok VA: The dynamics of hair growth and development. Dermatol Rep 4:1, 1985.
11. Godfrey DR: A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. J
Small Anim Pract 39:394, 1998.
12. Griffin CE: Personal observation, 1993.
13. Griffin CEo Open forum. Etretinate, how is it being
used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialogue,
Spring/Summer 1993, p 4.
14. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1992.
15. Gross TL, et al: Infiltrative mural folliculitis. Dermatopathology Session, Am Coli Vet Pathol, Albuquerque,
1997.
16. Gross TL, et al: An anatomical classification of folliculitis. Vet Dermatol 8:147, 1997.
17. Gross TL, et al: Follicular lipidosis in three rottweilers.
Vet Dermatol 8:33, 1997.
18. Gross, T. L., et al.: Subepidermal bullous dermatosis
due to topical corticosteroid therapy in dogs. Vet. Dermato!. 8:127, 1997.
19. Headington JT: Telogen effiuvium. New concepts and
review. Arch Dermatol 129:356, 1993.
20. Hodson S, et al: Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia
following surgical removal of a pancreatic carcinoma in
a cat. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 14:107, 1997.
21. Kimura T, Kunio D: The effect of topical minoxidil
treatment on hair follicular growth of neonatal descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:
107, 1997.
22. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Comparative
Dermatology. J. B. lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1964.
23. Kwochka KK, et al: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Vol 3. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 511.
24. Miller WH, Jr: Symmetrical truncal hair loss in cats.
Comp Cont Educ 12:461, 1990.
25. Miller MA, Dunstan RW: Seasonal Hank alopecia in
boxers and airedale terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1567, 1993.
26. Muller GH, et al (eds): Small Animal Dermatology,
3rd ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1983.
27. Olivry T: Newly recognized feline syndromes: Selected
topics. Proc. DVM Spring Seminar, Key West, 1998, p.
29.
28. Paradis M: Canine recurrent Hank alopecia: Treatment
with melatonin. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatolll:49, 1995.
29. Paradis M: Melatonin therapy in canine alopecia. In:
Bonagura J (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy XIII.
W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 546.
30. Paradis M: Melatonin in the treatment of canine pattern baldness. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Veterinary
Dermatology III. Butterwortb-Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 511.
31. Pascal-Tenorio A, et al: Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with internal malignancies in the cat. Vet Dermatol 8:47, 1997.
32. Power H: Personal communication, 1993.
33. Power HT, et al: Novel feline alopecia areata-like dermatosis: cytotoxic T-lymphocytes target the follicular
isthmus. Proc. World Cong Vet DermatoI3:74, 1996.
34. Power, H. T.: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc. Annu. Memb. Meet. Am. Acad. Vet. Dermato!'
Am. Coli. Vet. Dermatol. 14:27, 1998.

35. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Traction alopecia in the canine:
four case reports. Calif Vet 43:7, 1989.
36. Rosenkrantz WS, Griffin CE: Unpublished observations, 1999.
37. Rothstein E, et al: A retrospective study of dysplastic
hair follicles and abnormal melanization in dogs with
follicular dysplasia syndromes or endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
38. Schmeitzel LP, et al: Focal cutaneous reactions at vaccination sites in a cat and four dogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
2:39, 1986.
39. Scott DW: Thyroid function in feline endocrine alopecia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11:98, 1975.
40. Scott DW: Feline dermatology, 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
41. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret
sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
42. Scott DW: Seasonal Hank alopecia in ovariohysterectomized dogs. Cornell Vet 80:187, 1990.
43. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1995.
44. Scott DW, et al: Exfoliative dermatitis in association
with thymoma in 3 cats. Feline Pract 23:8, 1995.
45. Scott DW: Les agregats de melanine dans l'appareil
pilo-sebace: signification en dermatohistopathologie du
chat. Med vet Quebec 28:38, 1998.
46. Scott DW, Rothstein E: Trichoptilosis in three golden
retrievers. Canine Pract 23:14, 1998.
47. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the dog: literature review and
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
1999.
48. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: literature review and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
1998.
49. Scott DW: What's new in feline dermatology. Proc Br
Small Anim Vet Assoc, 1999, p 128.
50. Tasker S, et al: Resolution of paraneoplastic alopecia
followtng surgical removal of a pancreatic carcinoma in
a cat. J Small Anim Pract 40:16, 1999.
51. Thoday KL: Differential diagnosis of symmetrical alopecia in the cat. In Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
Therapy IX. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1986,
p 545.
52. Thoday KL: Aspects of feline symmetric alopecia. In:
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 47.
53. Thompson DL, et al: Prolactin administration to
seasonally anestrous mares: Reproductive, metabolic,
and hair-shedding responses. J Anim Sc. 75:1092,
1997.
54. Tieghi C, et al: Medullary trichomalacia: A retrospective study of 6 cases in German shepherd dogs. (Submitted for publication 1999).
55. Waldman L: Seasonal Hank alopecia in affenpinschers.
J Small Anim Pract 36:271, 1995.
56. Whiting DA: Structural abnormalities of the hair shaft.
J Am Acad Dermatol 16:1, 1987.
57. Wilcock BP, Yager JA: Focal cutaneous vasculitis and
alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 188:1174, 1986.
58. Yager JA, Wilcock BP: Color Atlas and Text of Surgical
Pathology of the Dog and Cat. Dermatopathology and
Skin Tumors. Wolfe Publishing, London, 1994.

Chapter

12
Congenital and Hereditary
Defects

C

ongenital and hereditary defects appear to be becoming more common. Some of
this apparent increase in frequency no doubt reflects an enhanced ability to diagnose these conditions. However, this does not explain all cases. Many of the disorders
discussed have an unproven mode of inheritance or are transmitted as recessive traits.
Breeding of apparently normal parents or siblings of an affected dog or cat distributes the
gene more widely, with the eventual production of new cases. Breeders of animals with
suspected or proven genodermatoses should be instructed to avoid breeding of all close
relatives of the affected animal.

• DISORDERS OF THE SURFACE AND FOLLICULAR
EPITHELIUM
A variety of disorders of keratinization or cornification are recognized in dogs and cats.
Those with a known or suspected inherited basis are discussed in this chapter, and the
remainder are covered in Chapter 14. Also included here are developmental defects and
inflammatory disorders with a hereditary basis.

Primary Seborrhea in Dogs
Primary seborrhea is used to describe animals with an inherited disorder of keratinization
or cornification. The epidermis, the follicular epithelium, the hair cuticle, and the claw
can all be involved.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Primary seborrhea is most commonly recognized in the American Cocker spaniel, English
springer spaniel, West Highland white terrier, and Basset hound.f 47. 71, 73, 80 Other breeds
affected include the Irish setter, German shepherd dog, Dachshund, Doberman pinscher,
Chinese Shar Pei, and Labrador retriever. I, 3.5,9 Other seborrheic breeds (e.g., English
bulldogs)5 are seen in certain hospital populations because of breeding practices in the
surrounding area. This disorder has been studied most extensively in the American Cocker
spaniel44-49 and the West Highland white terrier.P: 75, 88 Data from these breeds mayor
may not apply to other breeds.
A variety of cellular kinetic studies have been performed in normal beagles, normal
Cocker spaniels, and Cocker spaniels with primary seborrhea.w-" When the seborrheic
Cocker spaniels were compared with normal dogs, their basal cell labeling indices were
three to four times greater than normal values. The epidermis, the hair follicle infundibulum, and the sebaceous glands were all hyperproliferative, but the hair root matrix was
normal. 44,45 The calculated epidermal cell renewal time for these dogs was approximately
8 days45 as compared with 21 days for normal Cocker spaniels." Similar kinetic abnormalities have been demonstrated in seborrheic Irish setters." The hyperproliferative nature of
the Cocker spaniels' skin appears to be due to some as yet uncharacterized primary
913

914 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-1. A, Primary seborrhea in a Cocker spaniel. Hyperplastic ceruminous otitis externa. B, Primary
seborrhea in a Cocker spaniel. Seborrheic plaques in the intertriginous area of the ventral neck. C, Primary
seborrhea in a Cocker spaniel. Erythema, apolecia, and seborrheic plaques on the abdomen. D, Primary seborrhea
in a Cocker spaniel. Hyperkeratosis of the footpads and dystrophic claws in a I-year-old dog. E, Primary
Legend continues on opposite page

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 91 S

cellular defect because the hyperproliferation remains in cell culture and persists when
seborrheic skin is grafted onto normal dogs.45 , 48, 49
In an extensive study of 100 West Highland white terriers over 12 generations, the
inheritance of primary seborrhea was proved and it was probably transmitted as an
autosomal recessive trait." This mode of inheritance probably applies to other breeds
because single affected dogs can be recognized in litters of clinically normal parents.
Although labeled index studies were not performed in the seborrheic West Highland
white terriers, histologic and ultrastructural studies indicated epidermal hyperproliferation.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Because of the inherited basis of the disease, signs occur early in life and become more
severe with advancing age. Affected West Highland white terriers demonstrate clinical
changes at 10 weeks of age. 75 In most dogs, early changes such as mild flaking or dullness
of the coat are overlooked or attributed to intestinal parasites, inadequate nutrition, or
other puppyhood problems. Usually by 12 to 18 months of age, the dog is presented for
its seborrhea.
The presenting complaint varies from dog to dog. Common seborrheic findings include ceruminous, hyperplastic otitis extema (Fig. 12-lA); a dull coat with excessive
flaking of the skin; greasy malodorous skin, which is marked in body folds or intertriginous
areas; follicular casts; multiple discrete to coalescent, scaly or crusty pruritic patches
(seborrheic dermatitis) (see Fig. 12-1B and C); digital hyperkeratosis (see Fig. 12-1D);
and dry, brittle claws. Lesions of seborrheic dermatitis tend to be most severe around the
eyes and mouth, on the pinna, or in the intertriginous areas of the feet, axillae, or groin.
Most seborrheic dogs have all of the seborrheic abnormalities described previously,
but the severity of each varies from case to case. Irish setters and Doberman pinschers
tend to have dry flaky skin, whereas Cocker spaniels, Springer spaniels, West Highland
white terriers, Basset hounds, Chinese Shar peis, and Labrador retrievers usually exhibit
otitis, greasy seborrhea, seborrheic dermatitis, or typically some combination of these. The
greasiness and seborrheic dermatitis involve most or all of the body, but are most pronounced on the face, the ventral neck, the feet (especially interdigitally), the perineum,
and the ventral body. Basset hounds and Chinese Shar peis also have signs of the disorder
in their various body folds. The caudodorsum of these greasy dogs is often dry and flaky.
Aside from the visual and olfactory findings, pruritus occurs in many of these dogs.
This is especially true when the dog is greasy or has seborrheic dermatitis. The pruritus
follows the development of skin lesions, although it precedes the skin lesions in many
secondarily seborrheic dogs. Dogs with seborrhea are prone to secondary bacterial infections and Malassezia dermatitis (see Chap. 14). When dogs with primary seborrhea have
either condition, their skin lesions worsen rapidly and their pruritus increases dramatically,
especially when Malassezia dermatitis is present. In some cases, the lesions of the secondary infections are so severe and widespread that the seborrheic lesions cannot be appreciated until the staphylococcal or Malassezia component is resolved.

DIAGNOSIS
The clinical lesions in primary or secondary seborrhea (see Chap. 14) are identical; thus,
the diagnosis of primary seborrhea is made by exclusion. In dogs younger than 1 year, the
list of differential diagnostic possibilities is short and includes demodicosis, cheyletiellosis,

FIGURE 12-1. Continued seborrhea in a Persian cat. Kitten with a greasy, matted haircoat and patchy alopecia. F,
Canine icthyosis in a terrier-cross with generalized dry, hyperkeratotic, alopecic skin. The dog has appeared this way since
birth, G, Congenital ichthyosis in a dog, Marked hyperkeratosis and mild erythema in a pinna. H, Pinna and periocular
region of a dog with epidermal dysplasia. Chronic alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification.

916 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

nutritional deficiency, ichthyosis, epidermal dysplasia, and food hypersensitivity. In adult
dogs, the list is much longer.
The diagnosis of primary seborrhea is supported by biopsy. In noninfected flaky or
greasy areas, hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis is visible. There is usually a
marked keratinization defect, characterized by orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, follicular keratosis, and variable apoptosis of keratinocytes (Fig. 12-2). In many cases,
the epidermis is normal to slightly increased in thickness. In mildly inflamed lesions, the
perivascular cellular infiltrate is mild and consists of lymphocytes and plasma cells. In
inflamed lesions, the perivascular inflammation becomes more intense, and papillomatosis
and focal areas of parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (parakeratotic "caps") overlie edematous
dermal papillae (papillary "squirting") (Fig. 12-3). This capping is common at the follicular ostia." The follicular hyperkeratosis is typically orthokeratotic unless secondary infections are present. Bacteria are numerous in the surface, and follicular debris and yeast
may also be present. Evidence of secondary bacterial infection (e.g., intraepidermal pustular dermatitis or folliculitis) is common.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Primary seborrhea cannot be cured, and the ease of control varies from dog to dog. The
seborrheic changes in these dogs worsen Significantly with dietary inadequacies, external
parasites, or endocrine or metabolic diseases, so these dogs should be monitored carefully
for the development of any intercurrent disease. Seborrheic dogs are prone to secondary
staphylococcal infections or Malassezia dermatitis. Administration of an appropriate antibiotic or ketoconazole is often necessary at the onset of antiseborrheic therapy to resolve
pre-existing infections. During maintenance therapy, a sudden worsening of the dog's
seborrhea may indicate that the infection has returned and the dog should be examined.
The mainstay of treatment involves the use of antiseborrheic shampoos and moisturizers. The shampoo selection and the vigor of treatment depend on the nature of the
seborrhea.f Dry, uninflamed skin is easier to manage than greasy skin. Many dogs are

FIGURE 12-2. Canine seborrheic dermatitis. Hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis with
a marked keratinization defect and parakeratotic capping.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 9 I 7

FIGURE 12-3. Close-up of Figure 12-2. Papillary squirting.

both dry and greasy, and greasiness is especially prominent in the intertriginous regions
and between the toes and the pads. Long hair impedes the thorough cleaning of the skin,
especially when the area is greasy, so owners should be encouraged to keep the coat cut
short.
Dogs with dry skin with mild to moderate scaling usually require a bath once or twice
weekly to return the skin to near-normal condition. Dogs with heavy scaling need to be
bathed two or three times a week. This intense bathing is done for 2 to 3 weeks to
reduce the corneocyte count to near normal.P' and then the frequency of bathing is
gradually decreased to some maintenance level. Some investigators set a frequency (e.g.,
once weekly), whereas other clinicians allow the client to decide on the basis of the
individual dog's needs. As long as the dog is not prone to secondary bacterial infections,
the latter method is most appropriate. Overbathing any dog, but especially one with dry
seborrhea, can result in increased scaling.
A large number of grooming or antiseborrheic shampoos are appropriate for the
bathing of dry skin. Product selection depends on client and veterinarian preference. It is
advisable to start with the mildest product and change to a stronger one only if the initial
product is unsatisfactory. For mildly flaky skin, moisturizing hypoallergenic shampoos
(HyLyt"efa hypoallergenic moisturizing shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Allergroom
shampoo, Virbac; MicroPearls Advantage Hydra-Pearls shampoo, EVSCO; DermaPet All
Natural Conditioning Shampoo, DermaPet), colloidal oatmeal shampoos (Epi-Soothe, Virbac), or emollient-based chlorhexidine products (ChlorhexiDerm shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Nolvasan shampoo, Fort Dodge Animal Health; Hexadene shampoo, Virbac) are

9 I 8 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

commonly used. For more severe flaking, sulfur and salicylic acid products (MicroPearls
Advantage Seba-Moist Moisturizing Shampoo, EVSCO; DermaPet Seborrheic Shampoo,
DermaPet; Sebolux shampoo, Virbac; SebaLyt shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals) are appropriate. For recalcitrant cases, mild tar products (MicroPearls Advantage Tar Moisturizing Shampoo, EVSCO; Nusal-T shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals; T-Lux shampoo, Virbac)
might be appropriate but, because all tar products are degreasing agents, they should be
used cautiously.
When there is secondary Malassezia dermatitis, products with both an antiseborrheic
and antimycotic activity (Dermazole, Virbac; DermaPet Malacetic shampoo, DermPet;
MicroPearls Advantage Miconazole or Seba- Hex shampoos, EVSCO) are useful. Even
though the skin of seborrheic dogs is greasy, it is easy to irritate it, so caution should be
used when strong shampoos (e.g., benzoyl peroxides, selenium sulfides) are to be used.
If the dog's coat is dirty, a rapid shampooing with a non medicated grooming product
is indicated before the antiseborrheic bath. After the dog is lathered with the antiseborrheic product, the shampoo must remain in contact with the skin for 10 to 15 minutes for
maximal effect. Gentle manipulation of the dog's skin during this waiting period tends to
keep the dog happy and increases the cleaning action of the shampoo. After 10 to 15
minutes, the dog is rinsed thoroughly. Rinsing should take two to three times longer than
lathering. Prolonged rinsing not only removes the debris and shampoo but aids in hydration of the skin. The dry skin of many of these dogs becomes flaky again soon after the
bath, especially when the humidity is low. The application of an afterbath rinse or
conditioner helps to provide a barrier to transepidermal water loss and its associated
drying. Most manufacturers offer cream rinses for each shampoo they market, and one
typically uses the rinse that matches the shampoo. Although any afterbath rinse can be
effective, studies have shown that those containing oils, especially linoleic acid, are most
effective in decreasing transepidermal water IOSS.15 If the client keeps some diluted
product in a misting bottle and sprays it on the dog as needed, the frequency of bathing
can often be reduced.
For dogs with greasy skin, the shampoos must be stronger and need to be used more
often. These dogs are prone to bacterial or yeast infections and often have to be treated
with antibiotics or antifungal agents to control these secondary problems. Dogs with
mildly to moderately greasy skin can be treated with sulfur and salicylic acid or mild tar
products. Dogs with very greasy skin are often bathed with stronger tars (LyTar shampoo,
DVM Pharmaceuticals; Allerseb-T, Virbac), selenium sulfides (Selsun Blue dandruff shampoo, Abbott), or benzoyl peroxides (OxyDex shampoo, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Pyoben
shampoo, Virbac; MicroPearls Advantage Benzoyl-Plus, EVSCO). All these products are
excellent degreasers and create a dry seborrhea if used excessively. After the presenting
greasiness is resolved, many investigators switch to a less potent product or alternate
between a strong and a mild product. Greasy dogs often need an afterbath rinse, especially if the dog's environment has low humidity. Most strong shampoos can disrupt the
epidermal barrier and increase transepidermal water loss, with resultant worsening of the
seborrhea." An afterbath rinse can prevent this, but it may make the dog too greasy, so
each case must be approached on its own merits.
Seborrheic dogs usually have ceruminous otitis externa, which must be treated routinely and regularly. Instead of antiseborrheic shampoos, ceruminolytic ear flushes are
employed (see Chap. 19). The frequency of maintenance use is best determined by having
the client smell the ears. When the waxy odor is first noticed, the ears should be cleaned.
Despite vigorous cleaning, many of these dogs experience recurrent secondary bacterial or
yeast infections. These infections are heralded by the sudden need to clean the ears
frequently, otic pruritus, otic malodor, or combinations of these. Appropriate medications
should be dispensed promptly and used for 2 to 3 weeks. Ear surgery should be considered for dogs that have frequent infections.
If the client is unable or unwilling to bathe the seborrheic dog, it becomes an
unacceptable house pet. Some dogs, especially those that are greasy, have recurrent
bacterial or yeast infections despite the most diligent efforts of their owners. These dogs
are candidates for systemic treatment. Although omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid supple-

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 919

ments can be beneficial in these dogs;5 they rarely provide complete control and should
be used as an adjunct to other treatments. Because primary seborrhea is a hyperproliferative disorder, drugs that inhibit cell replication may be beneficial. Corticosteroids and
cytotoxic drugs are applicable in such circumstances. Because these drugs have severe side
effects and are needed for life, they should be reserved for cases in which all other
measures have failed.
Retinoic acids have been used extensively in seborrheic dogs, with varying results
from dog to dog and investigator to investigator. Although isotretinoin works in some
cases (1 to 3 mglkg q12h orally), results are usually disappointing.s? Most favorable results
have been obtained with etretinate. When 16 Cocker spaniels with severe seborrhea were
given etretinate at a dosage of 1 mglkg every 24 hours orally for 120 days, 15 dogs had a
moderate to excellent response.P In moderately affected dogs, improvement was marked
by day 60 of treatment. Severely affected dogs required longer courses of treatment for
maximal responses. This treatment has no effect on the hyperplastic otitis of these dogs,
and this must be managed by other means." Five West Highland white terriers and four
Basset hounds also studied showed no response to treatment." Ten of the 25 dogs treated
experienced side effects, including increased pruritus, reluctance to eat hard food, vomiting, stiff gait, conjunctivitis, and exfoliative dermatitis. The side effects disappeared with
withdrawal of drug administration and did not recur with alternate-day drug administration.
Etretinate has been removed from the market and was replaced by acitretin. Anecdotal information suggests equal efficacy in the treatment of seborrheic dogs when administered at 1 mg/kg q24h. Data on treatment with lower doses are not available. The high
cost of this agent will preclude its use in many dogs. Some investigators have returned to
the use of retinol (see Chap. 17). Because retinol is much more toxic than the retinoic
acids, the daily dosage should not exceed 400 IUlkg/day and the animal should be
monitored carefully for signs of toxicity.
If there is a response to retinol or a retinoic acid, treatment should be for life.
Alternate-day treatment is usually not satisfactory, and suggested regimens include administration for 5 of 7 days; 1 week on, 1 week off; or daily use during alternate months."
With long-term administration, some dogs may experience keratoconjunctivitis sicca and
should be monitored for this condition. If it occurs, drug withdrawal may result in the
regaining of tear function. Topical cyclosporine is usually effective if the etretinate administration cannot be stopped.' Both isotretinoin and etretinate can alter fat metabolism and
liver function. Alterations usually occur early in treatment and are mild and transitory.'
Long-term administration of etretinate has not resulted in severe metabolic changes in
normal dogs, but cases should be monitored periodically.
Vitamin D analogs are receiving much attention in the treatment of psoriasis (see
Chap. 15). These agents alter epidermal proliferation and terminal differentiation and
Significantly improve the skin lesions in psoriatic patients. When calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 ) was given at 10 ng/kg q24h to Cocker spaniels with primary seborrhea, over
60% experienced significant improvement''? and all dogs showed decreased cell proliferation in labeling studies. Because calcitriol can decrease PTH, electrolyte levels should be
checked.
Seborrheic dogs unresponsive to bathing or retinoid administration are usually destroyed by their owners. Most of those dogs have greasy seborrhea, which predisposes
them to near-constant bacterial or yeast infections. Maintenance treatment with antibiotics
or ketoconazole often makes these dogs more acceptable to their owners and less malodorous. The expense of these drugs often precludes their use in all but small dogs. As a
last resort, long-term corticosteroid or cytotoxic treatment is considered. Corticosteroids
can be beneficial in greasy dogs because of their atrophic effects on the epidermis and
sebaceous glands. Prednisolone is administered daily at 1 to 2 mg/kg until the greasiness is
controlled and then adjusted slowly to the lowest alternate-day dosage that is effective.
Some dogs require daily treatment.
Because these dogs are already prone to secondary infections and corticosteroids
aggravate that predisposition, these patients must be examined frequently. Most of these

920 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
dogs have signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism at some point in treatment. If the
corticosteroids administration is stopped, a severe rebound in the seborrhea can be
expected. Although we are aware of cases apparently well controlled with methotrexate,"
specific details on protocols, efficacy, and side effects are not available. Because this drug
is used in hyperproliferative disorders of humansf it should be of some benefit in dogs.
One of us (WHM) used azathioprine for pemphigus foliaceus in a seborrheic Cocker
spaniel. While the dog was receiving maintenance treatment (2.2 mglkg q48h), its seborrhea improved markedly. This suggests that drugs other than methotrexate may be beneficial. No details are available to support or refute that supposition.

Primary Seborrhea in Cats
Seborrhea is rare in cats, and primary seborrhea has been recognized in Persian, Himalayan, and exotic shorthaired cats. 59 , 71 An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance was
demonstrated in Persian cats. Cats of either sex or any coat color can be affected. Among
affected cats, the severity of the seborrheic signs varies. Severe seborrhea is obvious in
affected kittens by 2 to 3 days of age because their hairs paste together and they look
dirty (see Fig. 12-1E). Breeders usually euthanize these animals. With time, the whole
body becomes scaly and greasy and hair is lost (Fig. 12-4). Waxy debris accumulates in
the face folds and ears (Fig. 12-5), and the cats have a rancid waxy odor. Mildly affected
cats have similar signs, which are much milder and do not appear until about 6 weeks of
age.
Biopsy of noninfected skin shows a marked keratinization defect, characterized by
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and papillomatosis (Fig. 12-6). The perivascular cellular
infiltrate is mild and consists predominantly of lymphocytes.
No effective treatment has been reported for severely affected cats. Retinoic acids
have been used safely in cats" but are untried in primary seborrhea. A commercial
product containing omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (DVM Derm Caps) was used unsuccessfully in two cats." Mildly affected cats can be kept fairly normal by good grooming,
periodic clipping, and occasional bathing with antiseborrheic shampoos. Tar products
should not be used on cats.

Idiopathic Facial Dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan Cats
An idiopathic and presumably hereditary facial dermatosis of young Persian and Himalayan cats has been described.U: 74 Cats of either sex can be affected, and the median age at

FIGURE 12-4. Primary seborrhea in a Persian kitten. Alopecia
and marked comedone formation on
the ventral thorax and abdomen.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 921

FIGURE 12-5. Primary seborrhea in a Persian kitten. Marked accumulation of cerumen on a pinna.

onset is 12 months. Skin lesions are confined to the head, especially the periocular,
perioral, and chin regions (Figs. 12-7 and 12-8) and the neck, and are not caused by the
cat. With time, the lesions often become pruritic, which increases their severity and
distribution. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection also increases the symptoms and
severity of the lesions.
Affected cats have a dirty face with an adherent black exudate on skin and distal
portions of the hair shafts. The subjacent skin is inflamed, and the severity of the
inflammation increases with time, pruritus, or secondary infection. Most cats also have
accumulations of black, waxy materials in the ears. Histopathologic findings are nondiagnostic and include orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, crusting, and hyperplasia of the epidermis and mixed-cell superficial perivascular to interface dermatitis. Eosinophils, neutrophils,
and mast cells may be prominent, and pigmentary incontinence is usually present. Epidermal microabscesses containing eosinophils and neutrophils are occasionally seen.
No effective treatment has been identified. Topical and/or systemic treatments remove the exudate, but it reforms quickly after treatment is discontinued.

FIGURE 12-6. Primary seborrhea in a Persian kitten. Marked orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis, and mild lymphocytic
perivascular dermatitis.

922 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-7. Idiopathic facial
dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan
cats. Accumulation of keratosebaceous debris around the eyes of a
Himalayan cat.

Ichthyosis
Ichthyosis (fish scale disease) is a rare congenital skin disease and has been reported in
dogs and cats. It is characterized by excessive hyperkeratosis on all skin surfaces including
the digital, carpal, and tarsal pads.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Ichthyosis in animals! 8. 34. 51. 57. 78 resembles but is not identical to ichthyosis in humans.
Humans are affected by over a dozen ichthyosiform dermatoses. Most are inherited
disorders with the onset of signs at or near birth, but some appear in childhood or
adulthood. The skin disease can be accompanied by other developmental defects such as
mental retardation and short stature. Various classification schemes have been used to
describe the various ichthyosiform dermatoses, but none is ideal. Classifications focusing
on the clinical, genetic, and biochemical data overlook the histopathologic abnormalities,
whereas those revolving around ultrastructural alterations (e.g., epidermolytic and nonepidermolytic) probably are too narrowly focused. No classification system has been adopted

FIGURE 12-8. Idiopathic facial
dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan
cats. Exudation and crusting on the
chin of the cat in Fig. 12-7.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 923

for animals, but pathologists who have studied the disorder most intensively use the
epidermolytic/nonepidermolytic scheme."
Too few dogs and cats with ichthyosis have been reported in veterinary medicine to
characterize the disorder. Because the parents of affected dogs have been normal, cases
have been recognized in both sexes, and single cases have occurred in litters of five
puppies or more, an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance is most likely.5. 6 Beyond
histopathology, labeled index and ultrastructural studies have been performed in a small
number of dogs and one cat. Epidermal kinetic data have been gathered from one Jack
Russell terrier''! and three West Highland white terrier puppies." In these dogs, the
epidermal cell renewal time was approximately 3.6 days, which is 6 and 2 times faster
than normal dogs (23.4 days) or dogs with primary seborrhea (7.9 days), respectively.
Ultrastructural studies in two Cavalier King Charles spaniels" and one soft-coated
Wheaten terrier-'! showed changes (e.g., increased DNA and RNA synthesis) that are also
indicative of epidermal hyperproliferation in these, and probably most, dogs with ichthyosis. Additional ultrastructural irregularities in dogs include altered numbers and morphologic atypia of keratohyalin granules, curvilinear structures in the stratum corneum, and
alteration in the intercorneocyte spaces." 34, 51. 65 Ultrastructural studies in the cat showed
sparse keratohyalin granules and abnormal tonofilament morphology in the stratum corneum.P" The stratum corneum lipid layer of the Jack Russell terrier puppy showed
decreased free fatty acids and acylceramide levels and increased ceramide III levels.P'

CLINICAL FEATURES
Ichthyosis appears to be most common in West Highland white terriers but has also been
recognized in many other breeds. ~ Either sex may be involved, and all dogs are abnormal
at birth. Affected West Highland white terriers or Yorkshire terriers tend to be born with
black skin, which cracks and peels off at about 2 weeks of age. 5 , 18
Much of the body of these dogs is covered with tightly adhering, verrucous, tannish
gray scales (see Fig. 12-1F) and feathered keratinous projections, which give a rough
texture to the skin (Fig. 12-9). Although some of these projections adhere to the skin,
others constantly flake off, often riding up hair shafts in large sheets (see Fig. 12-1G).
Large quantities of scaly, seborrheic-smelling debris accumulate on the skin surface. Scaly,
erythematous dry patches are particularly prominent in the flexural creases and intertriginous areas. The horny layer of the nasal planum and digital pads thickens (Fig. 12-10).
Masses of hard keratin accumulate at the margins of the pads and often extend upward
from the margin in winglike projections. The entire paw of some patients appears grossly
enlarged, and the whole foot can seem heavier than normal. Hyperkeratosis may surround
the mucocutaneous junctions of the face, Some dogs have severe erythroderma or hair
loss." Insufficient details have been given about affected cats, but a striking cornification
defect is present from birth." 18 One kitten also had pronounced ectropion and eclabium."

DIAGNOSIS
If the dog is presented in early puppyhood, no other diagnoses are appropriate. If the dog
is presented as an adult with no prior history, all causes of seborrhea or exfoliative
dermatitis must be considered (see Chap. 14). The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy,
which usually reveals characteristic histopathologic changes, especially the prominent granular layer and the presence of many mitotic figures in keratinocytes. Marked orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 12-11) and focal digitate projections of hyperkeratosis may
occur. Follicular orthokeratotic keratosis and plugging are common. The epidermis mayor
may not be hyperplastic. One of the most characteristic histopathologic changes is marked
hypergranulosis, but this layer may be normal.' thin.?" or irregular." Mitotic figures may be
numerous. The superficial epidermis may contain numerous vacuolated keratinocytes,

'See references 1, 3, 5, 18, 34, 51, 65.

924 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-9. Close-up of skin from the chest of a 5-month-old Doberman pinscher with
canine ichthyosis, showing the laminated, tightly-adhering scales.

which may rupture and result in reticular degeneration. Severe reticular degeneration may
lead to microvesicle formation.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should understand the chronic nature, incurability, and difficult treatment of
ichthyosis. Although the affected dog's general health seems to be good, the skin changes

FIGURE 12- I O. Carpal pad of the dog in Figure 12- 7. Note the feather-like hyperkeratosis of the carpal pad.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 925

FIGURE 12-1 I. Congenital canine lamellar ichthyosis. Marked laminated orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.

are so severe and their management so difficult that these patients are troublesome house
pets. Still, a devoted owner may be capable of tolerating the burden of caring for these
dogs.
Frequent bathing and the use of emollient rinses helps these dogs. To facilitate the
cleaning and moisturization of the skin, the coat should be kept short. Harsh shampoos
(selenium sulfides, strong tar products, and benzoyl peroxides) should be used cautiously
because they can worsen the condition. In humans, ointments or solutions of 3% to 12%
lactic acid, 60% propylene glycol, or both are beneficial, especially if the skin is hydrated
before the agent is applied." Commercial moisturizers (Humilac, Virbac; Hylytrefa, DVM
Pharmaceuticals; HydraPearls Moisturizing Creme Rinse, EVSCO), a 5% lactic acid
spray," or a 50% propylene glycol solution?" can be useful in dogs.
Because of the intensity of topical treatment, most affected dogs are euthanized.
Retinoic acids can be very beneficial in the treatment of ichthyosis, but a response may
take up to 6 months of treatment'" and some dogs do not tolerate the drug. Both
isotretinoin (1 to 2 mglkg q12h) and etretinate (2.5 mg/kg q24h) are reported to be
effective, and daily treatment must be continued to maintain efficacy. Acitretin, the
replacement for etretinate, may be effective at a dose of 0.5 to 1 mglkg q24h.

Sebaceous Adenitis
In Standard poodles, sebaceous adenitis is believed to be inherited in an autosomal
recessive fashion (see Chap. 18).

Follicular Parakeratosis
A congenital, hereditary disorder of cornification has been described in multiple Rottweiler puppies and one Siberian husky puppy.52. 81 All cases have occurred in females,
suggesting an X-linked mode of inheritance. In addition to their skin lesions, affected dogs
and their littermates are likely to be stunted and have other noncutaneous congenital
defects.

926 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

CLINICAL FEATURES
Like dogs with ichthyosis, these dogs experience a generalized seborrheic condition at or
near birth that worsens with advancing age. Unlike the case with ichthyosis, the skin of
the nasal planum and footpads of these dogs remains normal (Fig. 12-12) and there is
minimal involvement of the glabrous skin of the abdomen, groin, and medial thighs.
Pruritus is uncommon unless there is a secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection. Early
on, the involved skin is scaly, but becomes thickened and crusted with time with numerous comedones. Hairs are often clumped together in a brownish-to-yellowish-to-blackish
waxy material (Fig. 12-13). In two Rottweilers, bands of hyperkeratotic, hyperpigmented,
often verrucous papules and plaques followed the lines of Blashko (Fig. 12-14). Advanced
cases have a marked body odor.

DIAGNOSIS
With the widespread seborrheic lesions present near birth, the diagnosis of a congenital
disorder of cornification is straightforward. With normal skin on the planum nasale and
footpads, other seborrheic disorders can be discounted, but skin biopsy is needed for
absolute confirmation of the diagnosis. Skin biopsies reveal a prominent surface and
follicular keratinization disorder with a mild-to-moderate superficial perivascular dermati-

FIGURE 12-12. Follicular cornification disorder. Accumulation of keratosebaceous debris on the
muzzle and bridge of the nose of a Rottweiler
puppy. Note the sparing of the nasal planum.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 927

FIGURE 12-13. Follicular cornification disorder. Hairs on the muzzle are pasted together into large
clumps.

tis. The surface epithelium is mildly affected and is hyperplastic and covered with a
basket-weave orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. The infundibular epithelium is hyperplastic,
and the pilar canal is filled with a densely packed parakeratotic hyperkeratosis that
projects above the skin surface in a conical fashion (Fig. 12-15A). Numerous lipid
vacuoles are visible in the parakeratotic debris (Fig. 12-15B). A secondary suppurative
bacterial folliculitis or Malassezia dermatitis may be visible. Ultrastructural studies performed in one dog detected abnormalities in keratinization only of the follicular epidermis. The cells in involved follicles had flattened nuclei, a less homogeneous interior, and
course bundles of tonofilaments. Numerous lipid vacuoles are present within involved
keratinocytes.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
No effective treatment for these dogs has been described. Bathing with strong antiseborrheic shampoos provides very short-term improvement; oral supplementation with zinc,
retinoic acids, or calcitriol has been unrewarding.

FIGURE 12-14. Follicular cornification disorder. Abdominal skin
showing bandlike hyperkeratosis and
follicular casting along the lines of
Blachko.

928 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-15. Follicular parakeratosis. A, Note remarkable follicular parakeratosis. B, Numerous lipid
droplets in the parakeratotic debris.

Epidermal Dysplasia in West Highland White Terriers
Epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers (Armadillo Westie syndrome) is an
uncommon condition that tends to occur in families in this breed." The mode of inheritance is unknown, but it is probably transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Dogs with this condition have a dysplastic epidermis and an inflammatory perivascular
dermatitis associated with Malassezia infection. Resolution of the Malassezia infection
results in the elimination of the inflammation but not the dysplasia. These findings,
coupled with an early age at onset, suggest that the dysplasia is an inherited disorder of
keratinization that predisposes the dog to Malassezia dermatitis and probably hypersensitivity to the organism.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Dogs of either sex can be affected, and signs usually begin between 6 and 12 months of
age, although some adult-onset cases have been recognized."? Typically, affected dogs have
a somewhat greasy coat before pruritus, the primary sign of this disorder, is recognized.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 929

The pruritus is initially focused at the face, the ears (see Fig. 12-1H), the legs (Fig. 1216A), the feet, and the ventrum (see Fig. 12-16B) and is mild to moderate. The involved
skin is inflamed, is greasy, and has large amounts of keratosebaceous debris on the
surface. With time, the pruritus becomes intense and the lesions more widespread.
Animals with advanced cases are greasy, nearly bald, lichenified, and often hyperpigmented (see Fig. 12-16C). Early on, there may be some improvement with large doses of
corticosteroids, but response to these drugs is soon lost. There is no response to antihistamines, antibiotics, and antiseborrheic shampoos.

DIAGNOSIS

In the absence of cytologic evidence of a secondary Malassezia dermatitis, the primary
differential diagnostic considerations are food hypersensitivity, scabies, and cheyletiellosis.
When yeast infections are present, atopy, primary seborrhea, and ichthyosis must also be
considered. The demonstration of Malassezia yeast via cytologic examination of the keratosebaceous debris does not confirm the diagnosis of epidermal dysplasia because yeasts are
common in some West Highland white terriers.f" Biopsy is necessary to confirm the
diagnosis. Areas sampled should not have the surface debris removed by close clipping or
presurgical cleaning.
Histopathologic findings include variable degrees of hyperplastic perivascular dermatitis with epidermal dysplasia (Fig. 12-17).3. 79 The epidermis shows varying degrees of
hyperchromasia, excessive keratinocyte mitoses, crowding of basilar keratinocytes, epidermal "buds," subepidermal linear alignment of mast cells, and loss of polarity (Fig. 12-18).
Lymphocytic exocytosis and diffuse spongiosis are prominent (Fig. 12-19). In properly
taken samples, marked parakeratotic surface and follicular hyperkeratosis is visible. In
most cases, numerous spherical to oval Single budding yeasts (Fig. 12-20) can be seen in
the surface and superficial follicular keratin. Yeasts are absent in some cases."
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
This condition is frustrating to manage. Resolution of the Malassezia dermatitis eliminates
the pruritus and returns the dog to near-normal status. A mild keratinization defect
(scaling, minor crusting) persists. However, because the treatments of yeast infection do
not completely eliminate the organism, the Malassezia dermatitis recurs after treatment is
discontinued.
Although various shampoos can be beneficial in the treatment of Malassezia dermatitis
(see Chap. 5), these dogs respond poorly to those treatments. Ketoconazole (10 mg/kg
ql2h-q24h for 30 to 45 days) is necessary to induce remission. Enilconazole (Imaverol,
Jannsen) rinses are also effective in countries where the product is available. Because the
epidermal dysplasia persists, the Malassezia dermatitis and its associated signs recurs.
Attempts to prevent reinfection by the frequent use of antiseborrheic or antifungal shampoos has been unrewarding. The use of these shampoos or a 50% white vinegar and water
rinse once or twice weekly can decrease the frequency of severe infections, but episodic
or constant use of ketoconazole or enilconazole is necessary.
Treating the epidermal dysplasia with fatty acid supplements (Derm Caps, DVM) or
retinoic acids (isotretinoin or etretinate) have been unrewarding in the few cases in which
it was atternpted.s?? The only method of control that we have found to be effective is the
daily or alternate-day administration of ketoconazole. This has been successful in two dogs
for longer than 3 years. Because of the expense of this treatment and poor prognosis for
cure, most affected dogs are euthanized.

Psoriasiform-Lichenoid Dermatosis in English Springer Spaniels
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis is rare and is recognized in only English springer spaniels. 25 • 55 The dermatosis begins in young dogs (4 to 18 months of age) of both sexes.
Asymptomatic, generally symmetric, erythematous, lichenoid papules and plaques are ini-

930 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-16. A, Epidermal dysplasia. Marked thickening and folding of erythematous, alopecic skin on a
limb. B, Epidermal dysplasia. Chronic alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification. C, Epidermal dysplasia in
a West Highland white terrier. Early erythroderma. D, Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis in an English Springer
Legend continued on opposite page

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 93 I

FIGURE 12-17. Epidermal dysplasia and Malassezia pachydermatis
infection in a West Highland White
terrier. Note marked epithelial budding of the epidermis and the hair
follicle's outer root sheath (arrows).

tially visible on the pinnae (see Fig. 12-16D), in the external ear canal, and in the
inguinal region (see Fig. 12-16E). With time, lesions become increasingly hyperkeratotic
(some almost papillomatous) and spread to involve the face, the ventral trunk, and the
perineal area. Chronic cases resemble severe seborrhea. The exclusive occurrence of this
dermatosis in English springer spaniels suggests a genetic predilection. It has been proposed that affected dogs have a distinct and exaggerated reaction to a superficial staphylococcal infection. 14
Skin biopsy reveals superficial perivascular to interstitial dermatitis with psoriasiform
epidermal hyperplasia and areas of lichenoid interface dermatitis, intraepidermal microabscesses (containing eosinophils and neutrophils), and Munro's microabscesses (Figs. 12-21
and 12-22).3 Chronic hyperkeratotic lesions frequently show papillated epidermal hyperplasia and papillomatosis.
This dermatosis is characterized by a waxing and waning course for 1 to 3 years.
Spontaneous remissions are not reported. Various medicaments, including anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids, oral vitamin A, levamisole, dapsone, autogenous vaccine, and
antiseborrheic shampoos, are of little or no help. In four cases treated with cephalexin (20
mglkg qI2h), response was excellent with complete resolution of lesions.v'

Schnauzer Comedo Syndrome
The Schnauzer comedo syndrome affects the backs of some Miniature Schnauzer dogs
and is typified by multiple comedones that may become crusted, nonpainful papules.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
This condition has been observed exclusively in Miniature Schnauzers. It seems to be a
seborrheic or acneiform disorder and occurs in only certain predisposed individuals. The
exclusive occurrence in Schnauzers and the clinicopathologic similarity to nevus comedonicus in humans- suggest that this syndrome may be a developmental dysplasia of hair

FIGURE 12-16. Continued spaniel. Erythematous lichenoid plaques on a pinna. (Courtesy of K. Mason.) E, Same
dog as in D. Erythematous lichenoid papules and plaques on prepuce. (Courtesy of K. Mason.) F, Miniature Schnauzer
whose back has been clipped to expose the area affected with lesions. G, Prominent, soft comedones on the skin of another
Schnauzer. H, Marked hyperkeratosis of the footpads in a Dogue de Bordeaux. (Courtesy of M. Paradis.)

932 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE

12-18. Close-up of
Figure 12-17. Epidermal dysplasia.
Increased mitosis, crowding, and
loss of polarity of basilar keratinocytes.

follicles with an inherited basis. After it is recognized, Schnauzer comedo syndrome can
usually be treated and easily controlled, but recurrences are common. However, there is
much variability, with some cases responding more favorably to therapy than others.

CLINICAL FEATURES
In the predisposed individual, comedones (blackheads) tend to form over the back. These
can be felt as sharp, crusted, papular projections above the surface of the skin. Some
comedones are soft and waxy.
The lesions are most numerous at the midspinal area of the back, fanning out laterally
and extending from the neck to the sacrum (see Fig. 12-16F). Schnauzer comedo
syndrome is seldom noted in the early stage before the comedo extrudes from the
follicular orifice. At that stage, there is no pain or discomfort. In some individuals, the
comedo changes into a soft, small, acne-like pustule and causes slight irritation (see Fig.
12-16G). Dogs do not usually display visible pain or itching. In some dogs, the plugged
follicles become infected. In these cases, the number of papular lesions increases rapidly;

FIGURE 12-19. Close-up of
Figure 12-17. Note diffuse spongiosis, lymphocytic exocytosis, and
focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 933

FIGURE 12-20. Close-up of Figure 12-17. Numerous yeasts in
parakeratotic follicular keratin.

they become much more widespread and can involve the entire trunk. If secondary
staphylococcal infection occurs, especially when it is widespread, the lesions tend to be
pruritic or painful.

DIAGNOSIS
Clipping a small spot on the back exposes the skin so the individual comedones and
papules can be seen. The restriction of these lesions to the caudal dorsum of a Schnauzer
with no other signs of disease is virtually pathognomonic of the condition. The diagnosis
can be confirmed by biopsy in which a section through one of the noninfected comedones
reveals a keratinous plug blocking the hair follicle and sebaceous gland. A small cystic
cavity is formed, lined by thin, stretched follicular epithelium and filled with keratin and
sebum (Fig. 12-23). Sebum secretion accumulates behind the plug, which further dilates
the cyst. If the follicle ruptures, a perifollicular inflammatory infiltrate appears. If a
secondary bacterial infection is present, perifolliculitis, folliculitis, or furunculosis may be
visible.

FIGURE 12-21. Psoriasiformlichenoid dermatosis in an English
Springer spaniel. Psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia and lichenoid
cellular infiltrate. (Courtesy of K.
Mason.)

934 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-22. Psoriasiformlichenoid dermatosis in an English
Springer spaniel. Epidermal microabscess containing neutrophils
and eosinophils. (Courtesy of K.
Mason.)

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The owner should be informed that, because of its genetic basis, the condition can be
controlled but not cured. Mild cases require no treatment and become apparent only
when the coat is clipped or plucked. If the owner finds the lesions objectionable or they
bother the dog or become infected repeatedly, topical antiseborrheic therapy should be
instituted. If a secondary infection is present, systemic antibiotics should be administered
for 3 to 4 weeks.
In mild cases, daily or alternate-day wiping of the area with various human acne
cleaning pads, alcohol, or Listerine antiseptic (contains 0.06% thymol, 0.09% eucalyptol,
0.06% methyl salicylate, and 0.04% menthol) loosens or dissolves the comedones. Benzoyl

FIGURE 12-23. Schnauzer comedo syndrome. Dilation and plUgging of hair follicles with
compact keratin (comedones).

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 935

peroxide gel also can be used but may be irritating with repeated application. In more
severe cases, antiseborrheic shampoos are indicated. Because these plugged follicles are
easily inflamed by harsh agents, the mildest shampoo should be used first and only
replaced by a stronger one if the first product is ineffective. Sulfur, tar and sulfur, benzoyl
peroxide, and benzoyl peroxide plus sulfur shampoos are most commonly used. Bathing
the dorsum twice weekly for 1 to 3 weeks removes the comedones, and then the
frequency is adjusted to the patient's needs. The rare case that is refractory to topical
therapy may benefit from the administration of isotretinoin at a dosage of 1 mglkg every
12 hours.' One case was trea'ted every-other day for 4 months after remission was
achieved, and then therapy was discontinued.P' No relapse was noted within a l-year
follow-up period.

Footpad Hyperkeratosis
Familial footpad hyperkeratosis has been reported in Irish terriers lOa. 41 and the Dogue de
Bordeaux."? Single cases have been recognized in several related Kerry blue terriers/' the
Labrador retriever, the Golden retriever, and mongrels." Studies in Irish terriers suggested
an autosomal recessive inheritance.P'
All cases experience severe hyperkeratosis by 6 months of age. All pads of all feet are
involved. The entire surface of the pad is involved, but the keratin is more compacted in
certain regions and forms horns (see Fig. 12-16H).5, 70 With severe hyperkeratosis, fissures and secondary infection can occur and cause lameness. In Irish terriers, claws grow
faster and their transverse profile is round rather than U-shaped. lOa No other skin lesions
are present.
Histopathologic findings include moderate to severe epidermal hyperplasia with
marked papillated and diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 12-24).70 Some fusion of
the conical papillae by keratin can occur. Electron microscopic studies in Irish terriers
were normal. lOa
Treatment is symptomatic. Daily soaks in 50% propylene glycol cause significant improvement within 5 days, but treatment must be continued to maintain the re-

FIGURE 12-24. Digital hyperkeratosis in an Irish terrier. Marked papillated hyperplasia and
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.

936 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
sponse. lOa , 70 Treatment with retinoic acids has been proposed but not tested. The mode of
inheritance has not been established.

Nasal Hyperkeratosis
An apparently hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis has been described in Labrador retrievers.v?
Because the sires and dams of affected dogs were clinically normal, the condition was
hypothesized to be autosomal recessive. The condition was recognized in males and
females between 6 and 12 months of age. It mostly affected the dorsal nasal planum and
was characterized by dry, rough, grayish, or brownish keratinous accumulations. Fissures
developed occasionally. The lesions were stable over time, and the dogs were otherwise
healthy. Histopathologic findings included mild to marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis,
moderate lymphocytic and neutrophilic exocytosis, and multifocal serous lakes within the
upper epidermis. A superficial interstitial-to-interface dermatitis is present. No response
occurred with antibiotic or zinc therapy. Improvement was marked with the topical
application of 60% propylene glycol, 2 to 3 times daily, but the hyperkeratosis rapidly
reappeared when treatment was stopped.

Aplasia Cutis
Aplasia cutis (epitheliogenesis imperfecta) is a congenital inherited discontinuity of squamous epithelium.s" 35, 58 It is considered an autosomal recessive trait in cattle, horses,
sheep, and pigs, but little is known of its inheritance in dogs and cats. The condition is
characterized by areas of abrupt absence of epithelium, with resultant ulcers. Histologically, the ulcerated areas are distinguished by the complete absence of epidermis, hair
follicles, and glands. The lesions of aplasia cutis in the newborn rapidly become infected,
and septicemia soon results in death. With supportive therapy, small lesions may heal by
scar formation. Skin grafting may be beneficial.

Dermal Dysplasia
A case of generalized dermal dysplasia was reported in a young mongrel dog.6 1 The dog
had multiple papules to nodules that had both epidermal and follicular abnormalities. The
epidermis was hyperplastic with irregular keratinization, and basal cells were absent in
some regions. Clusters of immature epithelial cells were present along the basement
membrane zone of the epidermis or hair follicles. The hair follicles were deformed and
surrounded by mucin.

Dermoid Sinus
A dermoid sinus is a neural tube defect resulting from incomplete separation of the skin
and neural tube during embryonic development. The sinus is a tubular indentation of skin
extending from the dorsal midline as a blind sac ending in the subcutaneous tissue or
extending through the spinal canal to the dura mater. The lumen becomes filled with
sebum, keratin debris, and hair. It may become cystic and is often inflamed. If infected, it
may produce meningomyelitis and neurologic clinical abnormalities. Rarely, dermoid sinuses may be associated with spina bifida-type lesions, hemivertebrae, and vertebral
fusions.t'
Dermoid sinus has been reported in multiple Rhodesian ridgeback dogs and their
crosses. I. 7, 23. 50a. 53. 54, 82 Individual cases in a Boxer, English bulldog, Shih Tzu, Chow
Chow, Boerboel, Yorkshire terrier, Great Pyrenees, English springer spaniel, and Siberian
husky have also been reported.v 12, 14a, 17, 21, 72, 74a, 82 The dermoid sinus of Rhodesian
ridge back dogs may be caused by a gene complex. The only available data concerning
inheritance of the dermoid sinus suggest that the factor may be inherited as a simple
recessive gene. 54 If so, complete eradication of the problem can be achieved by only a

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 937

program of progeny testing. However, by not breeding from affected animals, the incidence can be rapidly reduced. When additional cases occur, breeders should extend that
policy by not using either parent or any Sibling of an affected pup for breeding. The
problem is complicated further because dermoid sinus is not always easy to detect in a
young pup.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions are often noted in young dogs. Whorled hair may be seen along the topline
(normal in the Rhodesian ridgeback), or isolated whorls may appear at the dorsal midline
at the cervicothoracic or lumbothoracic junction. A tuft of hair may protrude from Single
or multiple small openings in the skin and a cord of tissue may be palpated, descending
from the skin toward the spine (Fig. 12-25). In densely coated dogs, the lesions are not
visible and go unnoticed until the sinus becomes infected or ruptures and induces a
draining pyogranulomatous dermatitis. 12, 17 In one dog, neurologic disease was precipitated
when the owner attempted to squeeze material out of the sinus. 74a
Diagnosis can be suspected on the basis of the anamnesis and the clinical appearance,
but it is confirmed by a fistulogram. A tract may be delineated from the skin to the dorsal
processes of the thoracic vertebrae. Lumbar myelograms may demonstrate attenuation of
the subarachnoid space near the termination of the fistula.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Sinuses that are quiescent need no treatment other than observation. If drainage or
neurologic signs are present, surgical dissection is the treatment of choice, but because of
the deep attachments of the dermoid sinus, complete removal is not always possible. The
tissue at the base is often fibrous, and careful blunt dissection is needed. Meningitis may
complicate these cases; therefore, extreme care should be taken to ensure an aseptic
technique during surgery. Successful surgery often results in complete recovery. Affected
patients should not be bred.

FIGURE 12-25. Dual fistulae opening on either side of the midline in the cervical region of
the Rhodesian Ridgeback dog are typical lesions of a dermoid sinus. (Neck has been clipped.)
Notice the whorled ridge of hair on the lower back from which the breed derived its name.

938 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
• Table 12-1

TYPES OF EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA (EB)

TYPE OF EB

EB simplex
Dowling-Meara, Weber-Cockayne,
Koebner
With muscular dystrophy
Junctional EB
With pyloric atresia
Nonlethal
Lethal
Dystrophy EB
Dominant
Recessive

STRUCTURE AFFECTED

DEFICIENT PROTEIN

Intermediate filaments

Keratin 5 or 14

Hemidesmosomes

Plectin

Hemidesmosomes
Anchoring filamentsJIamina densa
Anchoring filamentsJlamina densa

Integrins a 6 or f34
Type XVIII collagen or laminin 5
Laminin 5

Anchoring fibrils
Anchoring fibrils

Type VII collagen
Type VII collagen

Epidermolysis Bullosa
In humans, the term epidermolysis bullosa refers to a group of mechanobullous diseases.'
Most have a hereditary basis and are a result of a structural irregularity of the anchoring
complexes of the epidermis (Table 12-1). One disorder, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, is
a nonfamilial autoimmune disorder targeting collagen type VII of the anchoring fibrils (see
Chap. 9). The hereditary forms are divided into three major categories, namely epidermolysis bullosa simplex, junctional epidermolysis bullosa, and dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. All forms have been reported in animals.
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex is the most superficial disorder, with clefting occurring
in the basal layer of the epidermis. The first reports of epidermolysis bullosa simplex in
dogs were in Collies"? and Shetland sheepdogs/" Those dogs may have had dermatomyositis because the skin lesions mimicked those of dermatomyositis. We and others'P" have
examined multiple Collies and Shetland sheepdogs with the classic skin lesions of dermatomyositis but have been unable to demonstrate muscle disease by electromyography
(EMG) or multiple biopsies. These cases may be dermatomyositis without muscular involvement-'- 84 or epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
In junctional epidermolysis bullosa, blisters form within the lamina lucida (Fig. 1226) of the dermoepidermal basement membrane. Multiple clinical subtypes are recognized
in humans, and lethal and nonlethal variants are described in the dog. Junctional epidermolysis bullosa occurs in very young animals (e.g., at birth to 6 weeks of age) and has

FIGURE 12-26. Junctional epidermolysis bullosa in a puppy. Electron microscopy reveals smaller
than normal hemidesmosomes and
decreased electron density in the
underlying lamina lucida (arrows).
(Courtesy of R. Dunstan.)

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 939

been reported in a mongrel, Toy poodle, multiple Beaucerons, two German shorthaired
pointer Iittermates.P 22, 26, 60, 63, 65 and multiple Siamese cats." In the dogs, erosive-toulcerative lesions are most marked over bony prominences of the face, on the pinna,
pressure points on the limbs, and/or the footpads (Fig. 12-27). Lesions can also be in the
oral cavity, and the claws may be dystrophic. In the Beaucerons and German shorthaired
pointers, an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance was suspected.
The cats were presented for shedding of all claws with secondary bacterial paronychia
at 5 weeks of age. The sire of the kittens was affected. An autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance was suggested.
Histologically, animals with junctional epidermolysis bullosa show a subepidermal
separation with little or no subjacent dermal inflammation (Fig. 12-28). There was no
expression of type XVII collagen in the German shorthaired pointers, and there was no
abnormal expression of laminin 5, BPAG2 (type XVII collagen), integrin-os, and type VII
collagen in the mongrel.
Dystrophic (dermatolytic) epidermolysis bullosa has been described in a domestic
shorthaired cat,93 a Persian cat,66a an Akita,59 and multiple Beaucerons.s? The domestic
shorthaired cat had disease from 3 months of age, which included paronychia and claw
loss on all feet; ulceration of the gums, tongue, palate, and oropharynx (Fig. 12-29A); and
ulceration with crusting of the metacarpus, metatarsus, and digital pads (see Fig. 122gB). The Persian cat had juvenile-onset ulceration of oral mucosa and footpads, onychomadesis, and fragile skin at sites of mechanical trauma. The Akita experienced its first skin
lesions around 1 year of age. Footpad fissures and ulcers were the first lesions recognized,
followed by claw dystrophy and alopecia and scarring of the ear margins, tail tip, and
pressure points on the distal limbs. Multiple Beauceron pups from three separate litters
were examined for the early development of erosive crusty lesions around mucocutaneous
junctions and over pressure points and sloughing of claws. The dogs also had defects in
tooth enamel, retarded growth, and an abnormal stance. In all animals, skin biopsy
showed a sub-basilar dermoepidermal separation. Ultrastructurally, the separation occurs

FIGURE 12-27. Junctinal epidermolysis bullosa.
Full-thickness ulceration of the digital and main
carpal pads. (Courtesy of T. Olivry.)

940 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-28. Junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
Subepidermal
separation with minimal dermal inflammation. (Courtesy of T. Olivry.)

beneath the lamina densa, with a reduction in the number of anchoring fibrils. There is
decreased to absent expression of type VII collagen. 66a
To date, only one case of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita has been described in
animals (see Chap. 9).64 With the clinical, histologic, and immunofluorescence similarities
between this disease and bullous pemphigoid, it is possible that more cases exist but have
gone unrecognized. The one case reported involved a l-year-old Great Dane with acuteonset vesiculobullous disease involving the oral cavity, footpads, and truncal skin. Treatment with high levels of prednisone did little for the dog. On skin biopsy, the superficial
dermis had a bandlike, neutrophilic, lymphocytic, and histiocytic infiltrate with an overlying dermoepidermal separation. Immunologic studies demonstrated circulating autoantibodies to the NCI domain of type VII collagen.
Aside from topical and/or systemic antibiotics or antifungals, no treatments help these
animals. Management changes to minimize trauma may allow mildly affected dogs to lead
a reasonably comfortable life.

Familial Canine Dermatomyositis
Familial canine dermatomyositis is a hereditary, idiopathic inflammatory condition of the
skin and muscles of young Collies, Shetland sheepdogs, and Beauceron shepherds. 10. 21a, 27,
30.31 It has also been reported in the Welsh corgi, Lakeland terrier, Chow Chow, German
shepherd dog, and Kuvasz'' 62, 92 and has been recognized in other purebred dogs. The
familial basis in these other breeds is unproven.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The cause of dermatomyositis in humans or dogs is unknown. I, 13. 31 A genetically determined immune-mediated pathogenesis is suspected because of detectable immunologic
abnormaltties.P but it is unclear whether this immunologic reaction causes all of the
changes or is in response to some pre-existing muscle or skin damage. Although dermatomyositis could be induced by drugs, vaccines, infections (especially viral ones), toxins, or
internal malignancies, their causal relationship in dermatomyositis remains unproven.s
A familial history is rare in humans but common in Collies and Shetland sheepdogs.
Breeding studies in Collies support an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with
variable expressivlty." Studies in the Shetland sheepdog conducted by one of us (WHM)
and others'" suggest a similar mode of inheritance in this breed.

FIGURE 12-29. A, Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in a kitten. Oral ulceration. (Courtesy of S. White.) B,
Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in a kitten. Ulcerated carpal footpad. (Courtesy of S. White.) C, Shetland
sheepdog with dermatomyositis. Severe facial scarring and drop jaw. D, Dermatomyositis in a collie. Chronic case
with scarring alopecia on the bridge of the nose. E, Shetland sheepdog with severe, typical lesions on cheek and
eyelids. F, Dermatomyositis in a collie. Patchy alopecia and erythema over the cranial aspect of the carpi. G, Collie
with dermatomyositis. Alopecia of the tip of the tail. H, Hereditary lupoid dermatosis in a German shorthaired
pointer. Marked scaling and hyperkeratosis of the face and pinna. (Courtesy of M. Song.)

941

942 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

CLINICAL FEATURES
In Collies and Shetland sheepdogs, no coat color or coat length is associated with dermatomyositis. Either sex can be affected. Because of the familial predisposition, lesions occur
early in life, typically before 6 months of age. Signs in some dogs appear as early as 7 to
11 weeks of age. The progression of lesions varies. Some mildly affected dogs have few
lesions, which heal rapidly without scarring. Most dogs have new lesions after the first
ones are recognized, but the rate of progression is variable. The extent of the skin lesions
is known by 1 year of age. Unless management changes occur, lesions usually decrease in
number and severity from that point on.
Skin lesions occur in areas of mechanical trauma and are common on the face (see
Fig. 12-29C and D), especially around the eyes (see Fig. 12-29E) and muzzle (Fig. 1230); on the tips of the ears; on carpal and tarsal regions (see Fig. 12-29F); on the digits;
and on the tip of the tail (see Fig. 12-29G). Oral and footpad lesions are common but
especially occur in the Beauceron. Although intact vesicles can occur in some dogs,
primary lesions are usually absent. Typical skin lesions are characterized by alopecia,
erythema, scaling, and mild crusting. Ulceration can occur in severely affected dogs. Skin
lesions are usually not pruritic unless a secondary staphylococcal infection has occurred.
Cutaneous pain seems to be prevalent in Beaucerons. In mildly to moderately affected
dogs, large areas of normal skin remain, whereas in severely affected dogs, the entire face,
distal limbs, and tail can be involved. Some dogs have onychorrhexis (Fig. 12-31),
onychoschizia, or onychomadesis.
The myositis typically occurs months after the skin lesions are recognized and correlates with the severity of the skin lesions. Mildly affected dogs have no clinical muscle
disease; convincing evidence of this may not be found on EMG testing or muscle biopsy.
These patients may have epidermolysis bullosa simplex, dermatomyositis with focal but
undetected myositis, or dermatomyositis without the myositts.v' In humans, the diagnosis
of amyopathic dermatomyositis can be confirmed only when no muscle changes are
detected for 4 years or longer after the skin lesions have occurred. To our knowledge, this
type of follow-up testing has not been performed in dogs. The rare dog related to dogs
with classic dermatomyositis has EMG changes of myositis with no skin lesions. The
significance of these findings is unknown.
Clinical signs of myositis vary. A common finding is a dirty water bowl that contains
food particles. These dogs do not have trouble chewing their food, but do not swallow it
completely, so residual pieces are washed from the mouth during drinking. Some dogs

FIGURE 12-30. Dennatomyositis. Patchy depigmentation and scarring of the nasal planum. The lips
are also scarred.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 943

FIGURE 12-31. Dermatomyositis.
rhexis of all claws on all four feet.

Onychor-

have a peculiar high-stepping gait. Severely affected dogs drink, chew, and swallow with
difficulty; have a stiff gait; have megaesophagus; and often have secondary aspiration
pneumonia. The most common sign of the myositis is asymptomatic atrophy, especially of
the muscles of mastication and distal limbs. The rare dog has skin lesions only in
adulthood.P» 31, 92
DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnostic considerations should include demodicosis, staphylococcal folliculitis, dermatophytosis, discoid lupus erythematosus, and epidermolysis bullosa simplex.
The latter might be considered if there are no muscle signs or lesions and if vesicles are
present.
Diagnosis is confirmed by history, physical examination findings, biopsy of affected
skin and muscle, EMG, and laboratory tests to rule out other conditions. Biopsy of
affected skin shows scattered hydropic degeneration of the surface and follicular basal
cells (Fig. 12-32).3 Apoptotic basal cells (Civatte's bodies) occasionally are visible. With
confluent hydropic change, intrabasal or subepidermal clefting may be apparent (Fig. 1233). Dermal inflammation can be absent. Most cases show a mild perivascular to interstitial dermatitis in which lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes predominate. Mild
pigmentary incontinence may be present in the superficial dermis. Follicular atrophy and
perifollicular fibrosis are common findings (Figs. 12-34 and 12-35) and may be the only
findings in chronic lesions. Vasculitis occasionally is present in the skin. Muscle biopsy
may show mixed inflammatory exudates accompanied by muscle fiber necrosis and atrophy.31 Needle EMG abnormalities include positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials
in muscles of the head and of distal extremities.
Hemograms and serum chemistry profiles are usually unremarkable, but creatine

944 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-32. Dermatomyositis (epidermolysis bullosa simplex) in a collie. Marked
hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells without inflammation. (From Scott DW,
Schultz RD: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex in the collie dog. JAVMA 171:172,1977.)

kinase levels can be increased. Neurologic examination and nerve conduction studies are
usually normal. Elevated concentrations of immunoglobulin G and circulating immune
complexes may be found in active disease.P The magnitude of the elevations in immunoglobulin G and circulating immune complex levels correlates with the severity of the skin
disease."

FIGURE 12-33. Dermatomyositis (epidermolysis bullosa simplex) in a collie. Subepidermal
vesicle due to hydropic degeneration of epidermal basal cells. (From Scott DW, Schultz RD:
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex in the collie dog. JAVMA 171:172,1977.)

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 945

FIGURE 12-34. Canine dermatomyositis. Fibrosing dermatitis, with orphaned apocrine glands
and pigmentary incontinence.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The skin lesions of dermatomyositis are worsened by trauma and prolonged solar exposure. Management changes to avoid these secondary insults should be instituted. Mildly
affected dogs usually require no additional treatment because their skin lesions heal
spontaneously. Some of these dogs have permanently alopecic, hyperpigmented, and
scarred areas where the most severe active lesions were. Severely affected dogs are
difficult to care for. These dogs have widespread skin lesions and generalized myopathy,
which results in lameness and difficulty in drinking and eating. These dogs often have
aspiration pneumonia. Although large doses of prednisolone (1 to 2 mglkg q24h) improve
the skin lesions, it is difficult to maintain the animal on safe levels of the drug and the
steroid-associated muscle changes compound the pre-existing changes. Humane euthanasia
should be encouraged.
Mildly to moderately affected dogs can usually be maintained as acceptable pets for
extended periods. Some skin lesions remain and muscle atrophy, especially of the muscles
of mastication, is apparent. Oral doses of vitamin E (200 to 800 IV/day) or marine lipid
supplements (e.g., DVM Derm Caps) appear to be beneficial for the skin but not for the
muscle lesions. Some dogs require episodic courses of treatment with prednisolone (1 mg!
kg q24h) to control traumatic or solar flares. Other dogs, especially those with moderately
severe disease, need near-constant corticosteroid treatments. In these animals, pentoxifylline (Trental, Hoechst-Roussel) should be added to the corticosteroid regimen in the hope

946 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-35. Canine dermatomyositis. Perifollicular fibrosis.

of significantly reducing or eliminating the corticosteroid. The drug is given with food at
dosages of 200 to 400 mg q24h-q48hp·31. 36. 62 Response time is slow, with 2 to 3
months of treatment needed before efficacy can be determined.
These treatments usually minimize the development of new skin lesions, and those
that do occur tend to be milder. Muscle disease progresses, and old dogs have profound
atrophy of the muscles of the head, the distal limbs, and sometimes the body. With severe
atrophy, the animal's ability to eat and drink can be compromised and dietary manipulations become necessary. The limb and body atrophy can cause an abnormal gait, but
locomotion is still possible. Amyloidosis occurs in some chronically affected dogs.33

Idiopathic Ulcerative Dermatosis in Shetland Sheepdogs and Collies
The ulcerative dermatosis described in Shetland sheepdogs and Collies is of unknown
etiology. It was originally hypothesized to be a variant of dermatomyositis." Results of a
clinicopathologic study of five Shetland sheepdogs and two Collies with this syndrome led
the authors to conclude that it is distinct from dermatomyositis and should be renamed
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 9).38

CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions occur in middle-aged to older dogs with no antecedent history of skin disease.
The disease appears to be more prevalent in Shetland sheepdogs. No sex predilection is

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 947

noted, but relapses or exacerbations can occur with estrus. In all dogs, there can be cyclic
recrudescence, which often occurs in summer.
The initial lesions are vesiculobullous and are visible in the groin and then the axillary
regions. The bullae tend to be flaccid and centered in areas of figurate erythema. Lesions
coalesce and ulcerate to form large serpiginous lesions with distinct borders between
normal and abnormal skin. In some cases, lesions can be found on the eyelids, the pinnae,
the oral mucosa, the external genitalia, the anus, and the footpads. The lesions are painful,
especially if secondarily infected.

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations include bullous pemphigoid, erythema multiforme, systemic lupus erythematosus, and pemphigus vulgaris. Skin biopsy shows hydropic
degeneration of basal cells and extensive individual keratinocyte apoptosis, which can
extend into the stratum spinosum." 38 In severe cases there may be extensive blister
formation at the dermoepidermal junction. In the dermis, there is a superficial perivascular to partially lichenoid dermatitis. Interface folliculitis is often present. There is no
follicular atrophy. Direct immunofluorescence and antinuclear antibody test results are
negative. Some dogs have EMG abnormalities typical of dermatomyositis. Hemograms,
serum chemistry profiles, and ANA test results are usually unremarkable or negative.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Because lesions may be triggered or worsened by trauma, management changes to minimize trauma are appropriate. The photosensitive nature of the lesions makes photoprotection an important management consideration. Antibiotic therapy is indicated in cases with
secondary infections. Glucocorticoids, with or without azathioprine, the combination of
tetracycline and niacinamide, and vitamin E and pentoxifylline are reported to be effective. The cyclic nature of the disease can make maintenance management more difficult.

Canine Benign Familial Chronic Pemphigus
In humans, benign familial pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease) is an autosomal dominant
disorder of cellular cohesion among keratinocytes.f The exact nature of the defect is
unknown but probably lies between desmosomal protein 3 and desmosomal glycoproteins.
In the early stages of lesion formation, the intracellular components of desmosomes are
primarily disrupted." There are reduced quantities of desmoglein and plakoglobin in
normal-appearing epidermis." Because of the defect, the epidermis cannot withstand
trauma and vesiculobullous lesions develop in response to friction or infection. The
disease is a genetic weakness in desmosomes. A similar disorder has been reported in
English setters and their crosses.s- 84a The disorder has also been recognized in a Doberman pinscher." The disorder in English setters and their crosses was inherited in an
autosomal dominant fashion. 84a

CLINICAL FEATURES
Lesions occur in dogs at about 6 months of age and occur over pressure points on the
limbs,83 on the ventral chest,84a or on the pinnae (Fig. 12-36).5 Lesions are first characterized by alopecia, erythema, and slight scaling. Increased scaling and crusting occur later as
the lesions become plaquelike. Vesicopustules are rare. Lesions remain localized and
cannot be easily induced.

DIAGNOSES
The differential diagnosis is limited and includes pressure point irritation and superficial
bacterial folliculitis. Skin biopsy shows acanthosis with orthokeratotic and parakeratotic
hyperkeratosis and marked, diffuse, multifocal areas of acantholysis of the lower and
middle portions of the epidermis and follicular outer root shearh." The acantholysis is

948 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-36. Benign familial
chronic pemphigus. Multiple vesicular lesions on the inner pinnal surface of a Doberman pinscher.

often so marked that the appearance of the affected epidermis is likened to that of a
dilapidated brick wall. Acantholytic dyskeratotic keratinocytes (corps ronds) may be visible
(Fig. 12-37). Immunofluorescence testing yields negative results.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

In humans, treatment of infections with or without the use of topical corticosteroids and
avoidance of trauma usually provide good results.f Severe patients can be helped by the
administration of systemic glucocorticoids, methotrexate, dapsone, cyclosporine, and retinoids. Because the lesions in dogs are asymptomatic and localized, no treatment has been
attempted.

Hereditary Lupoid Dermatosis of German Shorthaired Pointers
The lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers is an uncommon disorder. Cases
have been recognized worldwide. 76. 86, 87. 89-91 Aside from a familial predisposition, no
cause of the dermatosis has been determined. Results of immunopathologic studies led

FIGURE 12-37. Benign familial
chronic pemphigus.
Suprabasalar
acantholysis with numerous dyskeratotic cells (corp ronds).

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 949

the authors to conclude that this syndrome should be renamed exfoliative cutaneous lupus
eruthematoeus'"
CLINICAL FEATURES
Typically, exfoliative skin lesions are first noted at about 6 months (3 to 36 months) of
age. Scaling and crusting appear first on the face, the ears, and the back and then in a
more generalized distribution (see Fig. 12-29H). The hocks and the scrotum may be
severely involved. The lesions are variably painful or pruritic. Pyrexia and lymphadenopathy may accompany the skin lesions. Lesions may have a waxing and waning course or be
persistent.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic possibilities include nutritional disorders, a primary keratinization disorder, drug eruption, sebaceous adenitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. The
rare dog has laboratory evidence (proteinuria and positive antinuclear antibody titer) of
systemic lupus erythematosus.P' Skin biopsy shows mild to moderate acanthosis, orthokeratotic and parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, hydropic degeneration of basal cells, and extensive
individual keratinocyte apoptosis with occasional satellitosis (Fig. 12-38).91 The individual
keratinocyte apoptosis is found throughout the stratum spinosum and may be confluent.
Basilar clefting may be present. Interface folliculitis accompanies the interface dermatitis.
The dermis shows a mixed cellular mild to moderate interface dermatitis, and sebaceous
glands may be normal, small, or absent (in about half the cases). Ultrastructural studies in
one dog showed decreased numbers of hemidesmosomes along the basal layer.f" Immunopathologic studies have revealed the following: epitheliotropic/folliculotropic/sebotropic
lymphocytes exhibited a unique CD3+, CD8a+, y8TCRl + phenotype; IgG, IgA, IgM, and
C3 were detected at the epidermal and infundibular basement membrane zone in 97%,
3%, 18%, and 13% of the sections, respectively; and circulating antinuclear antibodies
were not detected. 56
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
To date, no uniformly successful treatment has been reported. Antiseborrheic baths and
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids have given poor results. Fatty acid supplements may be beneficial,86,89 but some cases show no response to this treatment. A small
number of dogs have been treated with retinol or retinoic acids with no benefit. 87,90

FIGURE 12-38. Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointer. Hydropic interface
dermatitis. (Courtesy of T. Gross.)

950 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

• DISORDERS OF HAIRS AND HAIR GROWTH
A variety of inherited disorders of the hair shaft or hair growth are reported in dogs and
cats. I. 117 Congenital conditions are easily recognized because they occur near birth, when
they are easy to differentiate from endocrine and other acquired alopecias. Inherited
disorders with tardive onset are more difficult and can mimic a variety of other disorders.
Careful inspection of hairs via a trichogram or a skin biopsy differentiates inherited
disorders from other acquired alopecias. These tests should be performed routinely in
animals with abnormal hairs, for hair loss early in life, or for hair loss with an unusual
distribution.
Inherited hair disorders have no specific treatment. Nutritional supplements, special
diets, and so forth, as espoused by some breeders, are of minimal benefit. Good gentle
grooming is imperative to minimize secondary infections and seborrhea. Without the
normal protection of their coat, affected animals are susceptible to frostbite, sunburn, the
effects of low environmental humidity, and other environmental insults. With appropriate
management changes, these animals can lead nearly normal lives.

Structural Defects of the Hair Shaft
In humans, a variety of inherited or acquired conditions affect the shape, composition,
and strength of the hair shafts." Depending on the condition, the defect can be recognized because the scalp hairs are unmanageable or unusual in appearance or because the
hairs break easily with routine brushing or combing. Diagnosis is confirmed by light and
scanning electron microscopic examination of affected hairs.
Coat abnormalities are common in veterinary medicine, but only six hair shaft defects
have been reported. Undoubtedly, more occur but have gone unrecognized because
microscopic examination of hair shafts was not a routine part of the clinical evaluation of
patients with abnormal coats.

TRICHORRHEXIS NODOSA
In humans and animals, trichorrhexis nodosa is most often an acquired defect in which
external insults damage the cuticle and weaken the hair shaft (see Chap. 11). In humans,
some cases have an inherited basis," Two of us (WHM and DWS) have examined two
unrelated young Golden retrievers for a poor coat. At examination, there was no hair loss,
but the hairs were uneven in length. Trichograms showed nodular hair fracture typical of
trichorrhexis nodosa (Fig. 12-39). No systemic or topical cause of the problem could be
identified, and the condition persisted. These cases suggest that inherited trichorrhexis
nodosa may occur in animals.

TRICHOPTILOSIS
Trichoptilosis, the longitudinal splitting of the distal end of a hair ("split ends," "frizzles")
is probably a very common condition in dogs and cats who are repeatedly bathed, sprayed,
or otherwise treated topically with "mild" products or who have received one or more
harsh treatments. If the animal's hairs are weaker than normal because of some congenital
or acquired structural defect, the fracture will occur with minimal to no insult. Because
the shaft fracture occurs at the tip of the hair, the area involved is not hairless, but is
covered by hairs of unequal length. No other abnormalities should be detected.
Trichoptilosis was reported in three male Golden retrievers.v'" Two of the dogs were
Siblings. One dog had no history of topical treatments; the other two were treated with
flea sprays. All dogs had widespread disease with poor feathering on the limbs (Fig. 1240) and patchy hypotrichosis on the trunk (Fig. 12-41). Because one dog had disease that
arose spontaneously and the extent of the disease in the other two seemed to be disproportionally severe, a hereditary hair shaft hyperfragility was proposed.
The diagnosis of trichoptilosis can only be confirmed by trichography (Fig. 12-42).
The hair shaft distal to the fracture should be examined carefully for additional abnormali-

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 95 I

FIGURE 12-39. Trichorrhexis nodosa. Discrete splintering of hair.

ties that might explain the shaft fracture. If the shafts above and below the fracture point
are normal, a detailed history of topical treatments should be taken and suspected treatments should be stopped. Once the trauma is discontinued, the coat should return to
normal. If no insult can be found, it is unlikely that the coat will improve.

MEDULLARY TRICHOMALACIA
Medullary trichomalacia is an unusual hair shaft disorder wherein the medulla vacuolates
spontaneously. The disorder has been studied in detail in six German shepherd dogs,155
and a familial hyperfragility of hairs secondary to a disorder of keratinization is suspected
in this breed. Because this disorder has also been recognized in several other breeds, an
acquired, rather than congenital, etiology is also likely, but no cause was determined in
those dogs.
The German shepherds had multiple patches of involvement over the dorsum. Prior
to hair loss, the patches could be identified because the hairs lost their flexibility and
stood away from the rest of the coat. On close inspection, the hairs appeared thicker than

FIGURE

12-40. Trichoptilosis.
Shaft fracture at different points
along the hairs gives a disheveled
and uneven look to the coat.

952 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE

12-41. Trichoptilosis.
Same dog as in 12-40 with involvement of the hairs over the chest
wall.

FIGURE 12-42. Trichoptilosis ("split
ends") in a dog.

FIGURE 12-43. Medullary trichomalacia. Patch of hair fracture over
the shoulder region of a German
shepherd dog.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 953

FIGURE

12-44.

Medullary

trichomalacia in a dog.

normal, were stiff to the touch, and broke with minimal trauma (Fig. 12-43). The hair
loss in the other breeds was also patchy but not confined to the dorsum.
On trichography, the involved hairs have longitudinally split in the middle of the hair
shaft and the medulla is depigmented and vacuolated (Fig. 12-44). Skin biopsies from
affected areas show catagenization of most hair follicles, some of which contained increased numbers of apoptotic outer root sheath keratinocytes. Biopsies from normal areas
or involved areas that had returned to normal showed no abnormalities.
In all cases, normal hairs regrow spontaneously at the next shed cycle. Relapses are
uncommon. If a relapse occurs, the new patches can be more or less numerous and will
be in the same region but not necessarily in the same location.

PILI TORTI
Pili torti is a condition in which curvature of the hair follicle leads to flattening and
rotation of the hair shaft (Fig. 12-45). In humans, most cases have a hereditary basis and
the patients often experience other cutaneous and systemic abnormalities.' Localized
acquired pili torti can result from follicular inflammation.

FIGURE 12-45. Pili torti. Note 360degree twist of hair shaft on its long axis
(arrow).

FIGURE 12-46. A, Pili torti in a cat. (Courtesy of C. Foil.) B, Spiculosis in a Kerry blue terrier. (Courtesy of
H. Raue.) C, Congenital hypotrichosis in a dog. D, Congenital hypotrichosis in a Devon Rex cat. E, Black hair
follicular dysplasia. Note the marked hypotrichosis over the dorsum that spares white-coated areas. (Courtesy of C.
Foil.) F, Pattern baldness on the pinna of a 7-year-old dachshund. G, Pattern baldness on the ventral neck of an
Irish water spaniel. H, Pattern baldness on the tail and thighs of an Irish water spaniel.

954

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 955

FIGURE 12-47. Pili torti in a
cat. Note hypotrichosis and twisted
hairs. (Courtesy of C. Foil.)

pili tom has been reported in a litter of kittens-l'' and in some Bull terriers with
acrodermatitis.P" In the dogs, most hairs were normal, suggesting that the affected hairs
resulted from follicular inflammation. In the cats, all hairs were affected by 10 days of age
(Fig. 12-46A). In addition to the generalized hair loss, the kittens had periocular and
pedal dermatitis and paronychia. All secondary hairs showed the flattening and rotation
typical of pili tom (Fig. 12-47), but primary hairs were not involved. On biopsy, follicular
hyperkeratosis with occasional cystic dilatation was the only notable finding.

SHAFT DISORDER OF ABYSSINIAN CATS
Shaft disorder is an uncommon to rare condition of Abyssinian cats.P? Only whiskers and
primary hairs are affected. These hairs are rough and lusterless and have an onion-shaped
swelling visible with the naked eye, usually at the tip of the hair (Fig. 12-48). Hair
fracture can occur at the swelling. Skin biopsy shows no follicular abnormalities. The
cause of the condition is unknown, but because of its restriction to Abyssinian cats, it
must be considered an inherited disorder. No details on treatment are available.

FIGURE 12-48. Shaft disorder of
Abyssinian cats. Note the onionshaped swelling at the tip of the
hair.

956 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

SPICULOSIS
Spiculosis is a rare disorder of young intact male Kerry blue terriers.P? Affected dogs have
multiple, hard, brittle follicular spicules (see Fig. 12-46B), which are 1 to 2.5 mm in
diameter and 0.5 to 3 ern in length. The spicules can be found on any haired surface but
are most common over the lateral hock region. Although the spicules can be asymptomatic, most dogs lick or chew at them.
Biopsy shows follicular dysplasia with premature keratinization.P" This defect results
in an amorphous mass of keratin, which is shaped into the spicule by the outer root
sheath and the follicular wall (Fig. 12-49).
In asymptomatic dogs, no treatment is indicated and the spicules persist. In pruritic
animals, the only effective treatment has been with isotretinoin (1 mglkg orally q24h).
After 3 to 4 months of treatment, the spicules disappear. With discontinuation of the drug
regimen, the dog may remain normal or the spicules may redevelop. In the latter case,
maintenance therapy with isotretinoin is indicated.

Congenital Hypotrichosis or Alopecia
With congenital hair loss, hypotrichosis or alopecia is obvious at birth or develops during
the first 2 to 4 weeks of life. Some animals have only hair follicle disease, whereas other
animals also have involvement of other skin appendages. Additional ectodermal defects
such as abnormal dentition or tear production may also be noted. To categorize these

FIGURE 12-49. Spiculosis in a Kerry blue terrier.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 957

FIGURE 12-50. Chinese crested dog, a recognized breed.

animals accurately, Foil' proposed a numeric classification scheme, noting changes in hair,
teeth, claws, adnexal glands, or other ectodermal structures. Classification of newly recognized cases according to this scheme should help to categorize these disorders and remove
some of the confusion or misclassification in the veterinary literature.

ALOPECIC BREEDS
The best known examples of hairless dog breeds are the Mexican hairless dog and the
Chinese crested dog (Fig. 12-50). Other hairless breeds include the Inca hairless dog,
Peruvian Inca Orchid, and American hairless terrier. I, 119. 122. 124 In cats, the Sphinx (Canadian hairless) is bred for its hairlessness (Fig. 12_51).144

FIGURE 12-51. Feline alopecia universalis. (From Scott
DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph, JAAHA
16:331, 1980.)

958 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-52. American hairless terrier and its normally haired littermate, an
American rat terrier. (Courtesy of C. Foil.)

These hairless breeds resulted from the intentional breeding of animals with a spontaneous mutation. Aside from pets, these animals are useful in the study of sunscreens (see
Chap. 16), topical glucocorticoids,39a and topical hair growth stimulators such as minoxidil.123 Interestingly, minoxidil only stimulates hair growth in neonatal dogs. In the Mexican
hairless, an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance has been demonstrated.P" The
American hairless terrier (Fig. 12-52) was developed from American rat terriers with an
autosomal recessive hairless trait. I The hairless Mexican hairless dogs have a shorter
survival time than their haired relatives. 119. 124 This decreased survival may be due to a
familial immunoincompetence linked to the hairlessness. l ll b , 119

CONGENITAL HYPOTRICHOSIS
Congenital hypotrichosis is the term used to describe animals born without their normal
pelage or who experience non-color-linked hair loss within the first month of life. Some
animals have only hair follicle involvement, whereas other animals have additional ectodermal defects. Many cases are not well characterized.
Dogs

Congenital hypotrichosis has been described in the American Cocker spaniel, Belgian
shepherd, German shepherd, Toy and Miniature poodles, Whippet, Beagle, French bulldog, Rottweiler, Yorkshire terrier, Labrador retriever, Bichon Frise, Lhasa apso, and
Basset hound." We have recognized it in Cocker spaniel-Miniature poodle crossbreeds."
Most cases have been recognized in male animals, suggesting some sex linkage. The Xlinkage was proven in the German shepherd.'?' Most affected animals are born with
noticeable hair loss, which progresses over the next month or so. Some dogs are born

'See references 1, 3, 5, 101, 104, 105, 110, 113, 120, 126, 128, 133, 151, 154.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 959

normally haired but lose it shortly thereafter. I, 110 The hair loss is symmetric in distribution
and typically involves the temporal regions, the ear pinnae, the caudal dorsum, and the
entire ventrum (Figs, 12-53 and 12-54; also see Fig, 12-46C). Some patients are born
nearly baldl20, 151 or experience near-total hair loss by 12 to 14 weeks of age.ll o When the
hair loss is regionalized, it is well delineated from the adjacent normal skin, Early on, the
hairless skin is clinically normal, but it can become hyperpigmented and seborrheic with
time, If the dog is examined after its puppy teeth have been replaced by adult teeth,
abnormalities in dentition may be recognized,

Cats
Congenital hypotrichosis has been reported in Birman.l'" Burmese.?" Devon Rex,153 and
Siamese's" cats, Multiple kittens in the litter are involved, and no sex linkage has been
described. In Birman and Siamese cats, the condition is an autosomal recessive trait.
Affected cats either are born hairless (Fig. 12-55) or have a thin downy coat that is
lost in the first weeks of life (see Fig. 12-46D). Affected Burmese cats have no whiskers,
claws, or papillae on the tongue." At necropsy of affected Birman kittens, no thymus was
found. 102
The tentative diagnosis of congenital hypotrichosis in dogs or cats is straightforward
and is confirmed by skin biopsy (Figs. 12-56 to 12-58). In all cases, hair follicle
involvement is marked. In some cases, there is complete absence of follicles.l'": 102
whereas hair follicles are hypoplastic and decreased in number in other cases.P" 148 Adnexae (sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and arrector pili muscles) are reduced in number,
hypoplastic, or absent.

BLACK HAIR FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
Black hair follicular dysplasia is an uncommon disorder in which dogs with bicolor or
tricolor coats lose hairs in the black areas only at an early age.

FIGURE 12-53. The partially alopecic males compared with a full-coated sister. The pattern of
alopecia, which is bilaterally symmetric and includes about two thirds of the body surface, is the same
in both males, (From Selmanowitz VJ, et a1: Congenital ectodermal defect in miniature poodles, J
Hered 61:196, 1970,)

960 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-54. A, Diamond-shaped alopecic region over the dorsal pelvis and alopecia of the head and limbs.

B, Ventral view of affected male, showing the pattern of alopecia on the trunk and legs. (From Selmanowitz VJ, et

al: Congenital ectodermal defect in miniature poodles. J Hered 61:196, 1970.)

FIGURE 12-55. A Birman cat
with her hypotrichotic kittens. (Courtesy of J. King.)

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 961

FIGURE 12-56. A, Appendage-free skin from the head; hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and sweat glands are
absent. (Acid orcein elastica stain X 70.) B, Transition zone of appendage-free and appendage-containing skin.
Hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous gland cells (near the upper portion of the section of the follicle in the
center of the photograph) appear normal. The portion of dermis lacking appendages marks the beginning of a
large area of alopecia. There is no overt difference in the appearance of the epidermis and connective tissue on
either side of the transition. (From Selmanowitz VJ, et aI: Congenital ectodermal defect in miniature poodles. J
Hered 61:196, 1970.)

FIGURE 12-57. Canine hypotrichosis. Dystrophic hair follicles and abortive hair shafts.

962 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-58. Hereditary hypotrichosis in a Siamese cat. The poorly developed hair
follicles are devoid of hair shafts. (From Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A
monograph. JAAHA 16:331, 1980.)

Cause and Pathogenesis

Black hair follicular dysplasia is a familial disorder with near-uniform involvement of the
puppies with black coats. In one study, the condition was thought to be autosomal
recessive.v" Histologic and ultrastructural studies show disorders of pigment transfer and
cuticular abnormalities of the affected and some normal hairs. us The early age at onset
suggests that the defect in hair formation plays a significant role in the hair loss. With
disorderly proliferation of hair matrix cells, normal pigment transfer to the developing
hairs is not expected and the hairs are weakened even further. Some undetermined coat
color genetic influence or possibly a deficiency in melanocyte-stimulating hormone could
contribute to the pigmentary changes.'?"
Clinical Features

Black hair follicular dysplasia has been recognized in mongrels and purebred dogs of
many breeds, including the Bearded collie, Border collie, Basset hound, Papillon, Saluki,
Beagle, Jack Russell terrier, American Cocker spaniel, Schipperke, Cavalier King Charles
spaniel, Dachshund, Gordon setter, large Munsterlander, and Pointer." Dogs are born
normal but show coat changes by 4 weeks of age. Only the black hairs are affected (see
Fig. 12-46E). The first noticeable change in most dogs is loss of luster of the black hairs,
followed by progressive hair loss until all black hairs are lost. In large Munsterlanders,
dogs destined to lose hair are born with a gray and white, instead of a black and white,
coat."? Because these dogs are born with a gray coat, this syndrome may more appropriately be called color dilution alopecia. Because the hair loss is due to shaft fracture,
stubble can remain. Excessive scaliness occurs in the involved areas. The rate of hair loss
is variable, but near-total alopecia occurs by 6 to 9 months of age.
Diagnosis

The color-linked nature and early age at onset of the hair loss make the diagnosis
straightforward. Biopsy specimens from non black areas are normal, whereas black areas

'See references 1, 3, 5, 100, 108, 109, 118, 125, 129, 143, 147, 152.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 963

FIGURE 12-59. Black hair follicular dysplasia.
Follicular dilatation with the accumulation of keratin and large clumps of free melanin.

FIGURE 12-60. Patterned pinnal baldness. A 12-year-old cat
with hair loss restricted to the pinnae. The hair loss began early in
adulthood.

964 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-61. Legend on opposite page

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 965

show clumped melanin in epidermal and follicular basal cells and hair matrix cells.v 118
Large melanin granules (macromelanosomes) are visible within hair shafts, and the follicles are irregular, are dilated, and are filled with keratin, fragments of hair shafts, and
large clumps of free melanin (Fig. 12-59). The normal architecture of hair shafts is often
obscured, with unclear definition between cuticle, cortex, and medulla. Hair shaft outline
is irregular and focally bulging, and severely affected shafts may be rather amorphous
eosinophilic structures containing irregular clumps of melanin. Numerous peribulbar
melanophages occur in the dermis. The pigmentary changes are less pronounced than
they are in color dilution alopecia.

Tardive Hypotrichosis or Alopecia
Animals with tardive hypotrichosis or alopecia are born with normal coats. Focal, regionalized, or generalized hair loss occurs either about the time when the puppy coat is
replaced by the adult coat or when the animal is a young adult.

PATTERN BALDNESS
Pattern baldness has been reported in only dogs, and four syndromes are recognized. The
first is pinnal alopecia of male and, rarely, female Dachshunds. We have also recognized
this disorder in dogs of other breeding and in the cat (Fig. 12-60). Affected dogs slowly
start to lose hair from both pinnae at about 6 to 9 months of age, and the hair loss
progresses slowly to complete pinnal alopecia (see Fig. 12-46F). Complete baldness
usually occurs by 8 or 9 years of age. As the hair loss progresses, the exposed skin
hyperpigments. Aside from the pinnal hair loss, the animals have normal coats.
The second syndrome occurs in American water spaniels and Portuguese water dogs.
Hair loss in these dogs typically is noted at about 6 months of age and is restricted to the
ventral neck, the caudomedial thighs, and the tail (see Fig. 12-46G and H). Recognition
of this problem by the respective breed clubs has sharply reduced the frequency of
occurrence.
The third syndrome occurs in Greyhounds, and affected dogs experience hair loss on
the caudal thighs as might occur in early endocrine alopecia. Thyroid and sex hormone
testing shows no endocrine basis for the hair loss, and the loss stays restricted to the
caudal thighs.106 This condition must be differentiated from the bald thigh syndrome of
Oreyhounds.F" In the bald thigh syndrome, the hair loss is on the lateral thighs and
probably has an endocrine basis.
The last and most common syndrome is seen primarily in Dachshunds but also is
recognized in Boston terriers, Chihuahuas, Whippets, Manchester terriers, Greyhounds,
and Italian greyhounds. l , 3 The condition is recognized almost exclusively in female animals. At approximately 6 months of age, affected dogs gradually begin to lose hair in the
postauricular regions and along the ventral neck, on the entire ventrum (Fig. 12-6lA),
and on the caudomedial thighs. Hair loss is gradual over the next 12 months but remains
restricted to the described areas. Close inspection of the hairless skin reveals multiple
small fine hairs. The primary differential diagnosis for this syndrome is estrogen-responsive dermatosis (see Chap. 10). In estrogen-responsive dermatosis, the hair loss begins
later in life and leaves no residual hairs.
Histologically, pattern baldness is characterized by a decrease in size (miniaturization)

FIGURE 12-61. A, Pattern baldness on the ventrum of a 2-year-old dachshund. B, Color dilution alopecia in a blue
Doberman pinscher, C, Color dilution alopecia in a fawn Doberman pinscher. D, Follicular dysplasia in an adult red
Doberman pinscher. E, Follicular dysplasia in an adult black Doberman pinscher. F, Facial and pinnal hyperpigmentation
and alopecia in a Yorkshire terrier. G, Acanthosis nigricans, juvenile stage. Note the small hyperpigmented patches in the
axillae of this 6-month-old dachshund. H, Acanthosis nigricans, severe hyperpigmentation, and lichenification in a 5-year-old
dachshund.

966 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-62. Patterned baldness. Involution
and miniaturization of the hair follicles.

of the hair follicles and hair shafts with normal adnexal structures (Fig. 12-62).3 The
follicles are shorter and thinner, have smaller hair bulbs, and produce fine hair shafts.
When several dogs with recurrent flank alopecia and intercurrent pattern baldness
received melatonin, hair regrew in all locations. These surprising results led to larger
studies in which 11 dogs were either given oral melatonin (5 mg q24h) or 1 to 3 constantrelease 12-mg implants. All dogs experience significant hair growth within 45 days.139 Peak
response occurred after 3 to 4 months of treatment. Melatonin has a short half-life in
dogs when given by mouth or injection, and its bioavailability is dose dependent.Pl- 127. 139
Oral dosages of 3 to 6 mg q8h have been suggested. 139 Because all oral formulations in
the United States are nonprescription, potency and bioavailability may vary considerably
from product to product. If no change occurs within 30 days, a dosage increase may be
indicated.

COLOR DILUTION ALOPECIA
Color dilution alopecia (color mutant alopecia) occurs in some dogs with blue or fawn
coat colors. These colors are dilutions of black or brown, respectively, and result from the
influence of coat color genes at the D locus and possibly others. 1.36. 137 Color dilution
alopecia does not occur in all dogs with blue or fawn coats, and the frequency within
affected breeds varies.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 967

FIGURE 12-63. Follicular dysplasia. A symmetric, nonpruritic alopecia
in a tricolored Cornish Rex.

Cause and Pathogenesis

The cause of color dilution alopecia is unknown, but coat color genes play a significant
role in the condition. Under the influence of genes at the D locus and possibly others,
dilute hairs have larger pigment granules (macromelanosomes) than their nondilute counterparts. Although the hairs are lighter in color, they contain as much or more melanin
than nondilute black or brown hairs. Only one allele, d, is recognized at the D locus in
dogs.136 , 137 If this gene were solely responsible for color dilution alopecia, all dogs with
dilute coat colors would lose hair, but they do not. Unrecognized, deleterious alleles may
be present within certain breeds and cause lethal pigmentary changes, which result in the
hair loss.
All affected dogs have irregularities in melanin transfer and storage. Mature or stage
IV melanosomes are stored irregularly in hairs, and epidermal keratinocytes and vacuolization of melanocytes in some hair bulb cells suggests a degenerative process.P" Various
ultrastructural studies have been undertaken to determine whether concurrent structural
defects exist, and some conflicting results have been published. In the Doberman pinscher, the cuticle of affected hairs is normal except at the point of pigmentary clumping,
whereas cuticular defects were detected in affected and normal hairs from Yorkshire
terriers and Dachshunds.P" 98, 14.5 All of these data suggest that the dilution genes may
express themselves differently in different breeds and that a coincidental structural defect
may exist in certain breeds.
Clinical Features

Color dilution alopecia is most widely recognized and reported in blue or fawn Doberman
pinschers. 116, 136 It also has been reported in Dachshunds, Great Danes, Whippets, Italian
greyhounds, Chow Chows, Standard poodles, miniature Doberman pinschers, Yorkshire
terriers, Silky terriers, Chihuahuas, Boston terriers, Salukis, Newfoundlands, German
shepherds, Shetland sheepdogs, Schipperkes, Bemese Mountain dogs, and mongrels with
dilute coat colors." It has also been reported in cream Chow Chow and blond Irish
setters, but these cases may represent some other condition." The frequency of the
disease in blue or fawn Doberman pinschers can be as high as 93% in blues and 75% in
fawns.P" Incidence figures for other breeds are unknown but are probably much lower

'See references 1, 3, 5, 96, 98, 100, 102a, 132, 137

968 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
than they are in Doberman pinschers. Some breeds with a dilute coat color (e.g., Weimaraners) do not lose hair.
Color dilution alopecia can be first manifested by dorsally oriented, recurrent bacterial
folliculitis or hypotrichosis. Only hairs or hair follicles in the dilute areas are involved. The
onset of signs is tardive, and the starting point depends on management factors and the
depth of the coat color. Dogs with light-blue (e.g., gray) coats are usually affected at
approximately 6 months of age, whereas dogs with less dilution (e.g., steel blue) may not
have noticeable signs until 2 to 3 years of age or later. Vigorous grooming can accelerate
the process.
In the recurrent folliculitis form, papules and pustules occur and disappear with
appropriate antibiotic treatment. The involved follicles tend to remain hairless or regrow
hair slowly. With repeated bouts of infection, the hypotrichosis becomes more widespread
and persistent. In the hair loss form, secondary pyodermas can also occur but the history
and physical examination findings clearly show that hair loss preceded the infection. Dogs
with the hair loss form typically lose hairs first over the dorsum and then from the rest of
the body (see Fig. 12-61B and C). The rate of hair loss is variable, but most light-colored
dogs are almost completely alopecic by 2 to 3 years of age.
The initial hair loss in these dogs is due to shaft fracture, and some broken hairs
regrow. With time, the tendency to regrow decreases. Exposed skin is subject to environmental insults, and scaliness is common. One report suggests that these dogs may be
more susceptible to skin tumors.P' Because these dogs have no hair to protect against the
mutagenic effects of the sun, they should be photoprotected.
Cats with a blue or cream-colored coat carry the Maltese dilution gene. As in the dog,
this gene is expressed by clumping of melanin in the follicular epithelium and hair shafts
but rarely is associated with dysplastic changes in the hair follicles and hairs themselves. 150
We have recognized the pathologic changes of color dilution alopecia in the skin biopsies
of several other cats. The involved cats spontaneously experience symmetric truncal hypotrichosis to alopecia without a history or trichographic evidence of excessive grooming or
harsh topical treatments.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis varies with the age at onset. In the young animal, only other
inherited hair defects or demodicosis should be investigated. With onset at 2 to 3 years or
later, endocrine disorders, especially hypothyroidism, are considered for dogs with just
hair loss. All causes of superficial folliculitis should be considered in that presentation. In
the cat, all causes of excessive grooming need to be considered (Fig. 12-63).
Microscopic examination of plucked hairs shows numerous macromelanosomes, of
irregular shapes and sizes, unevenly distributed along the shaft. In some cases, the
macromelanosomes are huge and distort the hair shaft (Fig. 12-64). The cuticle may be
absent or fractured over the bulging pigment clumps (Fig. 12-65). Histopathologic study
initially shows sebaceous melanosis; melanin clumping in epidermal and follicular basal
cells (Fig. 12-66) and hair matrix cells; numerous macromelanosomes in hair shafts; hair
follicles in various stages of growth with follicular hyperkeratosis, fractured hair shafts, and
free clumps of melanin (Fig. 12-67); and numerous peribulbar melanophages.v 95, 136. 146
As mentioned before, the presence of melanin clumping indicates the action of dilution
genes and does not necessarily mean the animal has color dilution alopecia. Microscopic
examination of hairs from normal-coated color diluted dogs and cats reveals melanin
clumping, but the normal architecture of the hair shaft is preserved. Other changes of
follicular dysplasia, especially the presence of dysplastic hair shafts, must be present to
confirm the dtagnosis.v'" With time, all follicular activity ceases and the follicles become
dilated and cystic.
Clinical Management

Early on, hair loss is due to shaft fracture, so every effort should be made to avoid the
use of harsh shampoos and topical agents and vigorous grooming techniques. These

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 969

FIGURE 12-64. Color dilution
alopecia. Marked melanin clumping
and distortion of cuticular-cortical
anatomy.

FIGURE 12-65. Color dilution alopecia. Scanning electron microscopic views
(SEMs) of hairs from a normal black (A)
and affected blue (B) Doberman pinscher. The cortical irregularities in Bare
due to macromelanosomes. (Courtesy of
D. Prieur.)

FIGURE I 2-66. Color dilution
alopecia. Melanin clumping in surface epidermis.

970 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE

12-67. Color dilution alopecia.
Marked clumping of melanin ("melanotic mush")
in the pilar canal of a hair follicle.

measures should slow but not prevent hair loss. Anecdotal reports suggest that treatment
with oral retinoic acids can be of benefit, but specific details are unavailable.' Etretinate
was reported to occasionally help dogs with color dilution alopecia, resulting in decreased
scaling and decreased frequency and severity of bacterial pyoderrna.!" However, any hair
regrowth was partial and characterized by fine hairs.

FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
Non-color-linked follicular dysplasia has probably existed in veterinary dermatology for
decades but went unrecognized. The diagnosis in affected dogs typically was idiopathic or
nonresponsive endocrine skin disease because they had a spontaneous, symmetric, asymptomatic truncal alopecia. The dysplastic process was first reported in the Siberian husky in
1988142 and has been recognized in many different breeds since then. With the high
frequency of disease within certain breeds, genetic predisposition is most likely. Features
of the disorder vary somewhat with the breed involved.
Both cyclic and structural follicular dysplasia are recognized. As the name suggests,
cyclic follicular dysplasia is an interruption of the normal hair cycle, and affected animals
experience hair loss that spontaneously disappears in the next one to four shed periods.
The most common cyclic dysplasia is seasonal flank alopecia wherein affected dogs experience geographiC flank and/or saddle area alopecia and hyperpigmentation. The hair loss
usually occurs in the late fall or early spring, and regrowth is complete by late spring or

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 971
early fall, respectively. 107, lll, 140, 156 Other less common cyclic dysplasias are postclipping
alopecia and catagen arrest wherein spontaneous regrowth occurs, but in a much less
predictable fashion. In all of these disorders, skin biopsies show alteration in the hair
cycle, sebaceous melanosis, and the presence of dysplastic hair follicles." All of these
disorders are described in detail elsewhere (see Chap. 11).
In the structural dysplasias, the clinical picture (e.g., age at onset, distribution of hair
loss) varies with the breed. In addition to the presence of sebaceous melanosis and
dysplastic hair follicles, these dogs have other structural changes that weaken the hairs.
Fracture of these weakened hairs is the initial cause of the hair loss, and it occurs in areas
that have been too vigorously groomed or subjected to trauma (e.g., collar region).
Because the structural changes are mild initially, the hairs continue to grow and the hair
loss disappears spontaneously. However, the hair that regrows often is weaker than the
hair that was lost and the hair loss will recur because trauma is unavoidable. With each
and every episode, the structural changes become more pronounced, and eventually the
hair loss becomes more or less permanent.
Siberian Husky and Malamute

Multiple dogs in a litter can be affected. 141. 142 At 3 to 4 months of age, the guard hairs on
the trunk are lost in a slowly progressive fashion and the coat turns a reddish color. In
Malamutes, the onset of signs may not be seen until 3 to 4 years of age. The head and
the distal limbs are spared. Areas clipped for biopsy do not regrow hair. Secondary hairs
are less frequently involved.
Doberman Pinschers, Miniature Pinschers, and Manchester Terriers

Black or red dogs can be affected, and the hair loss is noted between 1 and 4 years of
age. 135 Hair loss begins in the flank region and progresses slowly to involve the caudal
dorsum and entire flank region (see Fig. 12-61D and E). Complete truncal hair loss has
not been recognized.
Airedale Terrier, Boxer, English Bulldog, Staffordshire Terrier, Wirehaired
Griffons, and Affen Pinschers

Hair loss begins between 2 and 4 years of age and is restricted to the flank and/or saddle
regions. 134 In some dogs, the hair loss persists, whereas cyclic loss and regrowth occurs in
other dogs (see Chap. 11).
Irish Water Spaniels, Portuguese Water Dogs, and Curly-Coated Retrievers

The hair loss in these dogs is due to hair fracture ..3, 103. 138 Alopecia is usually not
recognized until 2 to 4 years of age, but excessive hairs in grooming tools is recognized
from an early age. Hair loss occurs first over the caudal dorsum and spreads slowly to
involve most of the trunk. Early on, spontaneous hair regrowth can occur, but the new
hairs are not of normal quality and texture. These and other hairs, are lost eventually, and
the hair loss persists (Fig. 12-68). A dominant mode of inheritance has been suggested in
the Irish water spaniel.P''
Other Dogs

In recent years, we and other investigators have recognized one to several cases of
follicular dysplasia in the Shetland sheepdog, Labrador retriever, Chihuahua, German
shepherd dog, Bull mastiff, Pekingese, Australian shepherd, Rhodesian ridgeback, English
springer spaniel, German shorthaired and wirehaired pointer, Rottweiler, Chesapeake Bay
retriever, Miniature schnauzer, Bouvier de Flanders, and French bulldog. Undoubtedly,
many other breeds could be added to the list if pathology records were carefully reviewed.
Because too few cases within a specific breed have been published, details of the clinical
patterns are not available.
Follicular dysplasia has been recognized in a tricolored Cornish Rex cat. 150 The
symmetric hair loss affected the blue, beige, and cream-colored hairs (see Fig. 12-63).

972 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-68. Follicular dysplasia in a Portuguese Water dog. The dog has not been clipped
and has maintained this unusual pattern of alopecia
for several years.

Diagnosis

The primary differential diagnostic consideration in these dogs is endocrine hair loss,
especially that associated with the sex hormones. Histopathologic examination shows varying degrees of surface and follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, variation in follicular
activity with a high frequency of catagen arrest, melanin clumping within hairs and hair
bulbs, fractured hair shafts with clumps of free melanin in hair follicle lumina, peribulbar
melanophages, and frequent dysplastic hair shafts." 95, 146 Not all changes are present in
anyone case, and those present can vary in severity. All these changes, with the exception
of a large number of dysplastic hairs, can occur in endocrine skin disease as well. Huskies
have tortuous glassy membranes and follicular epithelial cell disarray.142 Portuguese water
dogs also show vacuolar alteration of the hair follicle inner root sheath (Fig. 12-69) and
hair matrix with ultimate dissolution of the hair matrix (Fig. 12_70).138
Treatment

Because the dysplasia in these dogs has a genetic basis, no treatment prevents the hair
loss. Superimposed nutritional deficiencies or endocrine diseases further weaken the already weakened hairs, so every effort should be made to maintain the animal's good
health. Harsh grooming techniques (e.g., stripping the coat) or products (e.g., benzoyl
peroxide shampoo) should be avoided and solar exposure should be kept at a minimum.
Invariably, owners hear of a nutritional supplement, dietary change, or other treatment

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 973

FIGURE 12-69. Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese Water dog. Marked vacuolar alteration of
the inner root sheath of the hair follicle.

that has helped other dogs with the same problem and want to try it on their pet.
Because spontaneous hair regrowth occurs in these dogs, regrowth cannot necessarily be
attributed to the change made. Only treatments that prevent new episodes of hair loss for
at least 1 year should be considered successful; we are unaware of any.

FOLLICULAR LIPIDOSIS
Follicular lipidosis is a variant of follicular dysplasia that is recognized worldwide in the
Bottweiler.U"- 115 Because of its recent recognition, clinical data are limited to four dogs,
Clinical Features

Both males and females can be affected, and clinical signs occur within the first 9 months
of life. The presenting complaint is hair loss in the mahogany points of the face and feet
(see Chap. 11). All black hairs and the mahogany hairs from other points are normal.
Diagnosis

The restriction of the hair loss to the mahogany points of the face and feet is pathognomonic for the condition. The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin biopsy, which shows
severe swelling of the matrix cells of anagen hair follicles. The swelling is due to accumulation of lipid within the cell's cytoplasm (see Chap. 11). Biopsies from clinically normal
mahogany points show scattered and mild swelling of anagen bulbs.

974 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-70. Follicular dysplasia of the Portuguese Water dog. Vacuolar alteration and dissolution of the hair matrix.

Treatment
Detailed long-term follow-up is not available, but it appears that the hair loss can resolve
or persist, but remains confined to the mahogany points of the face and feet.

Melanoderma and Alopecia in Yorkshire Terriers
Melanoderma and alopecia in Yorkshire terriers is a well-recognized but poorly studied
syndrome.v 94. 99 which appears to be decreasing in incidence. It is probably a genetic
dermatosis, but the mode of inheritance is unknown. The cause is unknown, but one
investigator demonstrated decreased dermal elastin and abnormal growth hormone response to clonidine administration in eight dogs.99 Typically, the syndrome affects Yorkshire terriers of either sex, beginning at 6 months to 3 years of age.
The dogs have symmetric alopecia and marked hyperpigmentation over the bridge of
the nose (see Fig. 12-61F), on the pinnae (Fig. 12-71), and occasionally on the tail and
feet. Affected skin is smooth and shiny. There is no pruritus or pain, and affected dogs
are otherwise healthy.
Skin biopsy specimens are reported to show orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis of the
epidermal surface and of the hair follicles and epidermal melanosis.
Some dogs with mild lesions appear to recover spontaneously. Most dogs remain

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 975

FIGURE 12-71. Melanoderma
and alopecia in Yorkshire terriers.
Total alopecia and marked hyperpigmentation of the pinna.

affected throughout their lifetime. Three dogs treated with growth hormone regrew hair
but lost it again.99

• DISORDERS OF PIGMENTATION

Hypopigmentary Disorders
Loss of skin pigment (leukoderma) or hair pigment (leukotrichia) has a variety of inflammatory or metabolic causes. Idiopathic cases occur with some regularity and have been
reported in dogs of various breeds.' The high frequency of these changes in the Belgian
Tervurens, German shepherd dog, Rottweiler, and Doberman pinscher suggests a hereditary influence in these breeds (see Chap. 13).

Hyperpigmentary Disorders
Aside from lentigines (see Chap. 13) or macular melanosis associated with testicular
neoplasia (see Chap. 10), hyperpigmentation in dogs and rarely in cats is poorly demarcated, involves large areas, and has a variety of inflammatory or endocrine causes. Acanthosis nigricans in some Dachshunds probably has a hereditary basis.

ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
Canine acanthosis nigricans is an uncommon cutaneous reaction pattern characterized by
axillary hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and alopecia in association with various known
and unknown causes.
Cause and Pathogenesis

Canine acanthosis nigricans is best thought of as a cutaneous reaction pattern with
multiple causes.t" 158, 165 The pathogenesis of the reaction pattern is poorly understood.
Canine acanthosis nigricans may be divided into primary (idiopathic) and secondary types.
Primary (idiopathic) canine acanthosis nigricans is almost exclusively a disease of
Dachshunds. The striking breed predilection and early age at onset strongly suggest that
this type of canine acanthosis nigricans is a genodermatosis. Indeed, one form of acanthosis nigricans in humans is known to be inherited."

976 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

Secondary canine acanthosis nigricans is associated with underlying disorders, including (1) friction or intertrigo (conformational abnormalities, obesity, or both resulting in
excessive axillary friction and dermatitis) with a secondary bacterial or Malassezia infection, (2) endocrinopathy (e.g., underlying hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, sex hormone imbalances), and (3) hypersensitivity (chronic axillary pruritus and dermatitis associated with atopy, food hypersensitivity, or contact dermatitis). In humans, acanthosis
nigricans has been associated with tissue resistance to insulin, drugs (e.g., nicotinic acid,
diethylstilbestrol, and glucocorticoids), and internal malignancy (especially of the gastrointestinal or female reproductive tract)." 162 Drug-induced acanthosis nigricans has not been
reported in animals, and the cases in dogs associated with malignancy may have had other
causes.164
Clinical Features

Although primary canine acanthosis nigricans has been reported in several breeds, Dachshunds are overwhelmingly the breed at risk. Primary canine acanthosis nigricans occurs in
either sex and begins in dogs younger than 1 year. Secondary canine acanthosis nigricans
may occur in any breed and is more commonly recognized in those predisposed to the
various underlying diseases described previously. Secondary canine acanthosis nigricans
generally mimics any sex or age predilection inherent in the underlying diseases.
The earliest sign of primary canine acanthosis nigricans is usually bilateral axillary
hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 12-61G). With time, lichenification, alopecia, and seborrheic
changes develop (see Fig. 12-61H). In severe cases, the dermatosis may spread to involve
the forelimbs, the ventral neck, the chest, the abdomen, the groin, the perineum, the
hocks, the periocular area, and the pinnae. Seborrheic skin disease (greasy with rancid
odor) and secondary bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis are common complicating factors. Pruritus is variable and is usually most severe when seborrheic changes,
bacterial pyoderma, or Malassezia dermatitis is present.
Diagnosis

The differential diagnosis of canine acanthosis nigricans includes the previously mentioned
causes of primary and secondary disease. Definitive diagnosis is based On history, physical
examination findings, laboratory tests that rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, and
response to therapy. Juvenile-onset acanthosis nigricans in a Dachshund is most likely to
be primary and genetic. Thyroid function is usually normal in Dachshunds with acanthosis
nigricans. Histopathologic examination is non diagnostic, revealing hyperplastic superficial
perivascular dermatitis with focal parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal melanosis, pigmentary incontinence, and follicular keratosis. The perivascular inflammatory infiltrate is
usually mixed mononuclear cells and neutrophils. A similar histopathologic pattern may
occur with many chronic inflammatory dermatoses.'
Clinical Management

The prognosis for cure in canine acanthosis nigricans varies with the underlying cause.
When the acanthosis nigricans is due to some definable and correctable disorder, the
lesions need no specific treatment and resolve spontaneously as the primary disease is
treated. Response may be slow. Primary canine acanthosis nigricans in the Dachshund is a
controllable, but not a curable, disease.
Early cases of acanthosis nigricans need no treatment. As the lesions become more
widespread and hyperplastic, the resultant seborrheic changes necessitate treatment. Antiseborrheic bathing and the frequent application of talc to the intertriginous areas is
beneficial, but provides only short-term improvement. When the lesions are confined to
small areas, the application of a potent topical glucocorticoid (e.g., betamethasone valerate
ointment) can be beneficial for some time. Eventually, the lesions become too widespread
for the safe use of these topical products. Advanced cases can be treated with melatonin,163 systemic glucocorticoids, or vitamin E.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 977

Systemic glucocorticoids are effective in the treatment of canine acanthosis nigricans,158 presumably via their anti-inflammatory, antiseborrheic, and anti-MSH effects.
Prednisolone or prednisone is given orally at 1 mglkg every 24 hours for 7 to 10 days, and
then on an alternate-morning regimen. Vitamin E acetate (dl-tocopherol acetate), 200
IV given orally every 12 hours as the only treatment, produced improvement within 30 to
60 days in eight cases of primary acanthosis nigricans.t'" Hyperpigmentation was not
reduced, but inflammation, lichenification, pruritus, greasiness, and objectionable odor all
subsided. There were no side effects, and improvement was maintained while treatment
continued.

Disorders of Atypical Coloration
Coat color is controlled by multiple genes with various known or presumed alleles at each
locus. In mice, in which coat color genetics is best known, certain coat colors are external
markers for serious internal disease. The importance of coat color in certain dermatologic
or systemic illnesses in pets is of increasing interest.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS
Animals born with a dilute coat color (e.g., blue or beige) are at risk for color dilution
alopecia. The best known examples of linkage of coat color with internal disease are cyclic
hematopoiesis and the Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome

The Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an inherited disorder of Persian cats, white tigers,
Hereford cattle, Aleutian minks, and hurnans.s" 160 In cats, it is an autosomal recessive
disorder occurring only in Persian cats with blue-smoke hair color and yellow eyes.
Microscopic examination of unstained hairs reveals multiple large, elongated, irregular
clumps of melanin (macromelanosomesl.t'" Affected cats have giant lysosomes in the
cytoplasm of various cells, including neutrophils and macrophages.P" On blood smears,
these lysosomes appear as large eosinophilic granules.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by increased susceptibility to infection,
partial oculocutaneous albinism, photophobia, and bleeding disorders. The cats have red
fundic light reflection instead of yellow-green. Because of the immunologic deficiency,
affected cats are at increased risk for infection. Most cases of dermatophytic pseudomycetoma have occurred in smoke-colored Persian cats.
There is no specific treatment. Affected animals should not be used for breeding.
Canine Cyclic Hematopoiesis

Cyclic hematopoiesis (gray Collie syndrome, or canine cyclic neutropenia) is a lethal
autosomal recessive syndrome in which Collie puppies are born with a Silver-gray haircoat
that differs from the normal sable or tricolor coat. 160 , 167 In some of these puppies, a slight
yellow pigmentation may be present, which produces a mixture of light-beige and lightgray hair. The light-colored nose is a characteristic and diagnostic feature.
In addition to the hair color change, gray Collie puppies are usually smaller and
weaker than their littermates, a difference observable by 1 week of age. By 8 to 12 weeks
of age, signs of clinical illness appear, including fever, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy, infections, conjunctivitis, and arthralgia. The term cyclic neutropenia reflects the appearance of
neutropenia alternating with rebounding neutrophilia. This cycle continues at 10- to 12day intervals until death. Other hematologic abnormalities include nonregenerative anemia
as well as cyclic reticulocytosis, monocytosis, and thrombocytosis.s 167 Other clinicopathologic abnormalities include hyperglobulinemia, depressed mitogenic responses of lymphocytes, and cyclic hormonogenesis.'

978 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
There is no effective treatment, and parents and littermates should not be used for
breeding. Affected animals usually die before 6 months of age without supportive care.
Even with optimal care, most die before 2 years of age because of hepatic or renal failure
associated with amyloidosis. Bone marrow transplantation is effective but impractical.l"? In
differential diagnosis, this syndrome must not be mistaken for the dominant or Maltese
gray collie and a transient dilution called powder puff.
Coat Color Dilution and Cerebellar Degeneration in
Rhodesian Ridgeback Dogs

An autosomal recessive trait in a family of Rhodesian ridgeback dogs has been described. l 58a Affected pups were born with a diluted coat color, and neurologic abnormalities were recognized at 2 weeks of age. The affected pups' coat color was bluish, and they
were ataxic, had difficulty in crawling and nursing, opened their eyes later than their
normal littermates, and did not grow normally. Most were euthanized at 4 to 6 weeks of
age. At necropsy, the dogs had Purkinje's cell degeneration and cutaneous abnormalities
typical of color dilution alopecia.

ACQUIRED DISORDERS
Coat color change in adult animals can be focal, regionalized, or generalized. Change can
be due to reversion to puppy coloration after trauma or endocrine disorders, temperature
effects, topical insults (e.g., sunlight and bleaching shampoos), nutritional disorders, drugs,
and endocrine diseases (especially hyperadrenocorticism and sex hormone imbalances).
Most of these conditions can occur in any breed. A peculiar gilding syndrome has been
described in Miniature schnauzers.
Acquired Aurotrichia in Miniature Schnauzers

This syndrome was first reported in 1991 and appears to be uncommon.P" Dogs of either
sex can be affected, and the disorder is recognized in young adult dogs, typically between
2 and 3 years of age. More than half of the reported cases started in warm weather, but
the condition can start in periods with minimal solar exposure. The cause of the alteration
in hair color is unknown, but because of the restriction to the Miniature schnauzer breed,
there must be some genetic influence.
Affected dogs typically have patchy color change of the hairs over the dorsal thorax
and along the abdomen (see Chap. 13).166 The affected hairs are golden in color. In a few
dogs, the color change is diffuse in those areas and may involve the periocular region or
ears. Concomitant with the gilding, the number of secondary hairs in the area is decreased. The dogs are otherwise healthy. Aside from some pigmentary changes in the
guard hairs, there is no histologic explanation for the gilding.
No treatment is indicated or should be effective. The condition resolves spontaneously
in 6 to 24 months. Both the coloration and the density of the undercoat return to normal.
Relapses are uncommon.

• DISORDERS OF COLLAGEN·
The best known example of a congenital disorder of collagen is Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
in which abnormal production or degradation results in abnormally fragile skin. The other
conditions discussed are less clear cut. They have a high incidence in certain breeds,
which suggests an inherited predisposition, and abnormalities in dermal collagen are
visible in biopsy specimens. However, it is not clear whether the collagen changes are
primary or secondary to some as yet described condition. Because of the striking breed
predisposition, the conditions are considered here.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 979

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, cutaneous asthenia, and dermatosparaxis are all terms used to
describe group of inherited connective tissues diseases characterized by excessive fragility
and hyperextensibility of the skin.65 • 176. 189 In humans, the term cutaneous asthenia is
reserved for cases wherein abnormalities in both collagen and elastin (cutis laxa) exist. The
cutis laxa syndromes are no longer included with the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes and have
not been definitively documented in animals. The term dermatosparaxis literally means
"tom skin" and is used to describe patients with one specific subtype, type VIIC, of
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in which the skin is extraordinarily fragile.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes in humans continue to undergo reclassification as the
molecular basis for the various clinical entities is identified. Currently, 10 subtypes, based
on the clinical features, mode of inheritance, and nature of the biochemical defect, are
defined; however, not all patients can be categorized in this scheme (Table 12-2).2. 173
The molecular basis for all subtypes is not known. Where known, mutations in the genes
coding fibrillar collagen or the enzymes that catalyze their post-translational modifications
have been identified.s All forms have a genetic basis, and six are inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait, three as an autosomal recessive trait, and one as an X-linked recessive
trait.
Because of the collagen defects, the skin of affected animals often tears easily,
resulting in large, gaping "fish mouth" wounds (Fig. 12-72A). These lacerations heal
readily but leave thin, highly visible "cigarette paper" scars (see Fig. 12-72B). The tensile
strength of the skin of affected dogs is reduced 40-fold, whereas that of affected cats is
reduced tenfoldP7.181 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome has been reported in sheep, cattle, mink,
dogs, and cats. l 7l • 177. 179. 181. 194. 196a Cases have been reported in various purebred and
mongrel dogs and cats with varying modes of inheritance.P?
Recessive cutaneous asthenia has been absolutely confirmed in only cats,170-172. 175. 187.
193, 195 but the occurrence of the disease in a mongrel dog with apparently normal parents
suggests a recessive form in dogs. 169 Affected collagen forms twisted ribbons rather than
cylindric fibrils and fibers (Figs. 12-73 and 12-74). These structural changes are due to
abnormalities in formation or maintenance of collagen fibrils and fibers.l 72. 182, 187 Biochemical studies have demonstrated a procollagen processing defect in which there is decreased
activity of procollagen peptidase and an accumulation of partially processed type I procollagen containing N-terminal propeptides.l'" Collagenase activity typically is increased 2Y2
times above normal levels,187
Dominant cutaneous asthenia is a simple autosomal trait in dogs and cats. Changes

• Table 12-2

TYPES OF EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME

TYPE

TISSUES AFFECTED

I
II

Skin, joints
Skin, joints
Skin, joints
Skin, blood vessels, intestine
Skin, joints, heart
Skin, joints, bone, eyes
Skin, joints
Skin, joints
Skin, joints, teeth
Skin, bones
Skin, joints, platelets
joints

III
IV
V
VI
VIla, b
Vile

VIII
IX
X
XI

ABNORMALITY

?
Collagen V

?
Collagen III
Procollagen (lysyl oxidase deficiency)
Procollagen (lysyl hydroxylase deficiency)
Procollagen
Procollagen (procollagen peptidase deficiency)

?
Copper deficiency (lysyl oxidase deficiency)
Fibronectin

?

FIGURE 12-72. A, Cutaneous asthenia in a cat. Hyperfragility of the skin. B, Typical appearance of a
Springer spaniel with cutaneous asthenia. Note the numerous scars on the back. (Courtesy of G.A. Hegreberg.)
c. Cutaneous asthenia in a dog. Hyperextensibility of the skin. (Courtesy of G. Ackland.) D, Cutaneous
asthenia in a dog. Same dog as in C. (Courtesy of G. Ackland.) E, Cutaneous asthenia in a cat. Hyperextensibility of the skin. (Courtesy of P. McKeever.) F, Collagen disorder of the footpads of a German shepherd. G,
Solitary fistula on the caudal metatarsal area of a German shepherd. H, Fluctuant swelling on the caudal
metatarsal area of a German shepherd.

980

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 981

FIGURE 12-73. SEMs of collagen fibrils in a fiber bundle from
the dermis of a dermatosparactic cat
(A), and a normal cat (B) (X 6000).
(From Holbrook KA, et al: Dermatosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: II.
Ultrastructural studies of dermal
collagen. J Invest Dermatol 74:100,
1980.)

FIGURE 12-74. A, Transmission electron microscopic view (TEM) of a collagen fiber bundle from the dermis of
the dermatosparactic cat showing fibers and fibrils in various planes of a section within the bundle (X 10,000). B,
TEM of a dermal collagen fiber bundle from the normal control cat. All fibrils within a fiber are organized in the
same plane (X 6200). (From Holbrook KA, et al: Dermatosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: II. Ultrastructural studies of
dermal collagen. J Invest Dermatol 74:100, 1980.)

982 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
are recognizable in the fetus, and the trait is probably lethal in the homozygous
state. 186, 196 The defect can cause focal or diffuse changes in the dermal collagen and
results from abnormalities in the packing of collagen into fibrils and fibers owing to
mutations of structural proteins. Unlike normal fibers in which the fibrils are uniform in
diameter, cylindric, and packed in uniform parallel arrays, the fibers here are severely
disorganized with many larger-than-normal fibrils.l"? A mixture of abnormal and normal
fibers occurs in heterozygous animals. Biochemical studies show a decrease in proteodermatan sulfate levels, an increase in hyaluronic acid levels, and an altered iduronic acid!
glucuronic acid ratio.P"
Dermal thickness in dogs can be thinner than normal (1.21 mm versus 1.71 mm)177 or
normal.I" The dermis in cats can also be thinned (0.25 mm versus 1.71 mm)173 or
normal." Normal dermal thickness is usually a result of an increased thickness of individual collagen bundles.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome has been reported in the Beagle, Dachshund, Boxer, St.
Bernard, German shepherd dog, English springer spaniel, Greyhound, Manchester terrier,
Welsh corgi, Red kelpi, soft-coated Wheaten terrier, Garafiano shepherd, Fila brasiliero,
and mongrels. 1, 169, 1823, 194, 197 We have recognized it in the Irish setter, Keeshond, Toy
poodle, and English setter." Most cases in the cat occur in domestic shorthaired or
longhaired breeds or Himalayan cats.

CLINICAL FEATURES
The skin is soft, pliable, and thin. It mayor may not be loosely attached to underlying
tissues or be hyperextensible. It has decreased elasticity and a moist, blanched appearance.
The skin usually can be stretched to extreme lengths (see Fig. 12-72C to E) and may
hang loosely in folds, especially on the legs and the throat. In long-coated dogs, the
excessive folding may be noticed on only the face and may result in the need for repeated
eyelid surgeries. Minimal trauma from traction or scratching may produce skin tears, with
little or no bleeding. Healing is rapid, but irregular thin white scars are prominent
disfigUring features (see Fig. 12-72B). Widening of the bridge of the nose, subcutaneous
hematomas, elbow hygromas, coincidental umbilical and inguinal hernias in a puppy, and
epicanthal folds are additional signs in some affected animals. Some animals manifest only
cutaneous hyperextensibility or only fragility, whereas other animals exhibit both features.
Some animals may have concurrent joint laxity and ocular changes (microcornea, sclerocornea, lens luxation, and cataracts). 169, 185

DIAGNOSIS
The clinical syndromes of excessively folded skin, hyperextensible skin, easily tom skin, or
excessively scarred skin in a young animal with no history of severe trauma are highly
suggestive of cutaneous asthenia. Complete documentation may necessitate biopsies for
ultrastructural and biochemical study. The skin extensibility index devised by Patterson
and Minor 192 is helpful. Extensibility is quantified by manually extending a fold of dorsolumbar skin to the maximal distance above the spine that can be attained without pain.
This distance is measured, as is the body length from the base of the tail to the occipital
crest. Extensibility is calculated as follows:
Extensibility index =

Vertical height of skin fold
d I gth
X 100
Bo y en

In affected dogs, the skin extensibility index is greater than 14.5%; in affected cats, it
is greater than 19%.177
Skin biopsy may reveal striking dermal abnormalities or normal skin. The inability to
detect histologic changes is common in the cat.'?" When changes are present, the collagen
fibers may be more eosinophilic than normal and blurred in appearance, fragmented,
shortened, and disoriented (Fig. 12-75). Additionally, collagen fibers may form irregularly

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 983

FIGURE 12-75. Cutaneous asthenia. Histopathologic view showing fragmented collagen
fibrils that are shortened and disoriented.

sized bundles, may demonstrate improper interweaving, and may be surrounded by mucinosis.!" Alternatively, the collagen may appear normal on light microscopy.P" Masson's
trichrome stain is useful in the light-microscopic evaluation of animals with collagen
disorders. In a study of normal cats and diseased cats with either Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
or the acquired fragility syndrome, the normal cats showed no staining abnormalities
whereas 11 of the 12 diseased cats showed trichrome abnormalities of varying severity.F"
All 8 cats with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome showed staining abnormalities, even though lightmicroscopic abnormalities were absent in 6 cats evaluated with hematoxylin-and-eosin
stain. The cat with no trichrome abnormalities had the acquired fragility syndrome.
However, this technique is not foolproof because one cat with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
had no trichrome abnormalities.!"

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The clinician should inform the owner of the nature, heritability, and chronic incurable
course of the disease. The animal should not be used for breeding. Most affected animals
are euthanized.
With appropriate lifestyle and housing modifications and prompt veterinary attention
to wounds and intercurrent skin diseases, pets without joint laxity can lead long lives. Cats
should be declawed to prevent wounding during grooming or scratching. The affected
animal cannot play with other animals and must be leash-walked away from woody trees
and shrubs. All visitors to the pet's household must be aware of the defect lest a sudden
grab for restraint results in a large skin wound. Households contain numerous items with
sharp comers or rough surfaces, which can rip the affected pet's skin. These must be
removed or padded. Because these animals are prone to hygromas, floors and all resting
places should be well padded. Any skin disease, especially conditions that result in pruritus, must be addressed and resolved quickly. Wounds should be sutured promptly.
Because vitamin C is necessary in collagen synthesis, two of us (WHM and DWS)
treated three dogs and two cats with oral vitamin C. The cats were given 50 mg twice
daily, whereas 500 mg twice daily was used in dogs. No change occurred in the cats,
whereas two of the three dog owners were convinced that their dog's skin was less

984 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

stretchy and less fragile with the vitamin supplementation. Further investigations with
vitamin C are indicated to support or refute these findings.

Disorder of the Footpads in German Shepherd Dogs
The cause of this condition is unknown. Signs occur early in life, and multiple dogs of a
litter are typically affected. The condition shows some clinical and histologic features of
the familial vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs, suggesting some common etiopathogenesis.
CLINICAL FEATURES

German shepherd dogs of either sex are affected at a few weeks to a few months of
age.5, 168, 178 One case in an ll-month-old dog has been reported.l'" Usually, multiple dogs
in the litter are involved. The pads of all feet are softer than normal. Swelling, depigmentation, ulceration, and crusting can develop on one or more pads (see Fig. 12-72F),
especially the metacarpal and metatarsal pads. When ulcerated, the pads are tender and
can cause lameness. The dogs are otherwise healthy.
DIAGNOSIS

In the absence of a drug history to induce a drug eruption or skin lesions elsewhere, the
clinical signs are typical of this disorder. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy, which reveals
deep diffuse dermatitis focused around multifocal areas of collagenolysis (Fig. 12-76).
The inflammation can be neutrophilic" (Fig. 12-77) or lymphoplasmacytic.v"
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Treatment with antibiotics, glucocorticoids, and topical agents has been unrewarding. With
foot protection and good wound care, the ulcers heal spontaneously by 1 year of age. The
pad softness remains. Long-term follow-up of most dogs has not been reported, but some
dogs have developed renal amyloidosis and died by 2 to 3 years of age.5 , 178

FIGURE 12-76. Collagen disorder of the footpads of German shepherds. Diffuse to nodular
dermatitis.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 985

FIGURE 12-77. Close-up of Figure 12-76. Focal accumulations of neutrophils and mononuclear
cells around degenerate collagen.

Focal Metatarsal Fistulation of German Shepherd Dogs
Metatarsal fistulation (deep metatarsal/metacarpal tortis, sterile pedal panniculitis) is an
uncommon disorder of German shepherd dogs, one of unknown etiology. 183. 184, 190, 191 The
condition appears to be most common in dogs of direct German ancestry." All affected
dogs that have been studied have had significantly elevated antibody levels against type I
and II collagen.P- 188 These latter findings suggest some familial disorder of collagen.

CLINICAL FEATURES
With the exception of one German shepherd dog crossbred, all cases have occurred in
German shepherd dogs between the ages of 2 and 8 years.f 183, 184 In two reports on 55
dogs, 45 were males.P" 190 The dogs that we have examined have all been of direct
German ancestry and are low at the carpi and tarsi (flat-footed). Lesions are initially
asymptomatic, and the owners become aware of them only because the dog licks the area
or because bloody spots are seen on the floor.
Lesions occur on the central plantar surface of the metatarsus just proximal to the
metatarsal pad (see Fig. 12-72G). Both hind legs are involved in most dogs, and the
occasional dog has similar lesions above one or both metacarpal pads, 183, 184 At examination, a well-demarcated fistula with serosanguineous discharge is visible. Palpation identifies a fibrous tract to deeper tissues. Early lesions have an intact epithelium, with fluid
accumulating beneath the surface, yielding a smooth, rounded, fluctuant cystic structure
(see Fig. 12-72H). No other skin lesions may be identified, or those lesions may coexist
in dogs with German shepherd pyoderma (see Chap. 4) or other infections.P''

DIAGNOSIS
With a Single lesion, the differential diagnostic considerations include a foreign body or
focal bacterial or fungal infection. Bilaterally symmetric lesions in a German shepherd dog
are pathognomonic.
Cytologic evaluation of the draining fluid shows pyogranulomatous inflammation with

986 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
or without intracellular bacteria. Closed lesions are sterile, whereas open lesions may be
secondarily infected by staphylococci. Biopsy shows deep nodular to diffuse dermatitis
with fibrosis and fistulous tracts (Fig. 12- 78). The cellular infiltrate is predominantly
pyogranulomatous. Hair follicle rupture with endogenous foreign body reaction to follicular keratin and hair shafts is common.
Routine laboratory evaluations are noncontributory, and antinuclear antibody titers are
negative. Titers of circulating antibodies to type I and II collagen were significantly
elevated in 11 dogs. 188 Because nonaffected German shepherd dogs were not tested, the
significance of these anticollagen antibodies is unknown.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
If the dog has other skin lesions, all must be treated simultaneously for good results.
Surgical removal of the fistula and deep tissues provides temporary improvement, but new
lesions re-form weeks to months later. Systemic antibiotic treatment improves secondarily
infected lesions, but has no effect on early lesions. Prednisolone administration at 1.1 to
2.2 mglkg every 24 hours results in resolution of the lesions in most dogs in 14 to 28
days. Vitamin E given at 200 to 300 IV q 12h has resolved the lesion in one dog and
reduced the maintenance of glucocorticoid dosage in two others.l'" Spontaneous resolution
in one dog has been reported.l'" After resolution, the lesions may never recur l84 or
relapses may be episodic. In these cases, repeated treatments with prednisolone are
effective, but can induce signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. Treatment with vitamin
E or a topical corticosteroid may be beneficial. The twice-daily application of a 0.01%
Huocinolone acetonide in dimethyl sulfoxide solution (Synotic, Syntex) to early lesions has
prevented fistulation and has been satisfactory for long-term control in many dogs. 5 The
combination of tetracycline and niacinamide is also effective (see Chap. 3).

Multiple Collagenous Nevi
Solitary collagenous nevi (see Chap. 20) can occur in any breed of dog. In some German
shepherd dogs, multiple collagenous nevi develop between 3 to 5 years of age. These skin
lesions are a cutaneous marker for renal cystadenocarcinomas or uterine leiomyomas. This
trait appears to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.

FIGURE 12- 78. Metatarsal fistula
in a German shepherd. Deep dermal
pyogranulomatous inflammation with
fisulation.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 987

• DISORDERS OF ELASTIN
Cutis Laxa
Cutis laxa (dermatochalasis, elastolysis) is a hereditary disorder of elastic fibers in humans
characterized clinically by skin that is pendulous, flaccid, hanging in folds, and seemingly
excessive compared with the individual's body size. Cutaneous fragility is not present. The
disorder is characterized histologically by a progressive loss of elastic fibers.
Cutis laxa has been anecdotally described in a Matin de Naples in France.F" No
histopathologic documentation of the diagnosis was supplied.

• DISORDERS OF VESSELS
Aside from the rare case of congenital hemangioma or arteriovenous fistula, inherited
disorders of blood vessels are rare. Most cases of vascular disease are due to an acquired
vasculitis (see Chap. 9), but an idiopathic and apparently familial vasculopathy has been
described in five breeds of dogs.

Familial Vasculopathy

BEAGLES
A systemic necrotizing vasculitis of small to medium-sized arteries is well described in
colony-bred Beagles. 212 No sex predilection is noted, and signs occur early in life (4 to 10
months of age). Signs are cyclic and include fever, lethargy, unwillingness to move, and a
hunched stance. No skin lesions have been described.

GERMAN SHEPHERDS
Affected dogs have signs at 4 to 10 weeks of age, and the signs often occur 7 to 10 days
after the first immunization.F" 210. 214 No sex predilection is noted. The dogs are lethargic
and pyrexic and have a peripheral lymphadenopathy and skin lesions. The bridge of the
nose is swollen and crusted, ulcerated lesions occur on the ear margins, the nasal planum,
and the tail tip. All footpads are soft and swollen with variable depigmentation. In severe
cases, the central portion of the pads can ulcerate. One dog experienced generalized
demodicosis.F"
Skin biopsy shows nodular to diffuse lymphohistioplasmacytic dermatitis around degenerated collagen bundles and subtle vascular alteration, especially of postcapillary venules. 214 Depigmented lesions have a hydropic interface dermatitis with pigmentary incontinence. Necropsy reveals collagenolysis of footpads, peritendinous sheaths and deep fascia
of the distal limbs, and ventrum.
Treatment with antibiotics or glucocorticoids causes minimal to no improvement.
Dogs recover spontaneously by 5 to 6 months of age, with residual scarring at points of
ulceration. The pads remain soft. Pyrexia, lethargy, or panosteitis can occur at each
subsequent immunization.
To date, no cause of the condition has been defined. It is unclear whether there is
some systemic immunologic abnormality that results in the vasculitis or whether the
vessels are abnormal. The condition appears to have an autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance.

GREYHOUNDS
Large numbers of racing Greyhounds have manifested this condition (see Chap. 9).198 No
sex predilection is noted, and signs can occur in dogs 6 to 72 months of age. Approxi-

988 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-79. Legend on opposite page

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 989

mately 75% of cases have only skin lesions, whereas the remainder have renal plus
cutaneous signs. In the latter situation, signs of renal disease are typically noted when the
skin lesions are found, but they can precede or follow the skin lesions.
Skin lesions occur primarily over the tarsus, the stifle, or the inner thigh. Occasionally,
the forelimb is involved. The first sign noted is swelling and tenderness, followed by
sharply demarcated deep ulcerations. Lesions vary from 1 mm to 10 cm in diameter.
Lesions heal slowly but spontaneously with routine wound care.
Skin biopsy shows thrombosis of arterioles, venules, and capillaries in the superficial
or deep dermis.P" There is speculation that this disorder is similar to the hemolytic
uremic syndrome in humans.F'< 199 That syndrome is most typically caused by a verotoxin
(shiga-like toxin) that damages the vascular endothelium. Most racing Greyhounds eat raw
meats, which likely contain the toxin producing Escherichia coli. It remains to be seen
whether a familial vascular predisposition also exists.

SCOTTISH TERRIERS
This condition has been reported in five Scottish terrier puppies, and no additional cases
have been reported with the withdrawal of their parents from the breeding program. 209
Affected dogs first experienced a bilateral nasal discharge at 3 to 4 weeks of age, followed
by progressive ulceration and destruction of the nasal planum, the nostrils, and the nasal
mucosa by 5 to 6 months of age (Fig. 12-79A and B). No treatments were effective. Skin
biopsy showed nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis with leukocytoclastic vasculitis (Fig. 12-80). The condition probably had an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.

JACK RUSSELL TERRIERS
Five cases of cutaneous vasculitis have been reported in the Jack Russell terrier, and we
and others have examined additional cases in this breed.P'? Although the cases recognized
in the mature adult dog may have a familial basis, the disorder recognized in dogs less
than 1 year of age is more convincingly a genetically influenced condition.
Typical of the lesions occurring with small vessel vasculitis, these dogs have alopecic
and discretely ulcerated and crusted skin lesions of the bony prominences of the head and
extremities, V-shaped necrotic areas of the pinnae (see Fig. 9-51), and punctate ulcers of
the footpads. The lesions in three of the five reported cases arose 2 to 3 weeks after
routine vaccination. Treatment with dapsone (1 mg/kg q8h), prednisolone (1 mg/kg q24h),
vitamin E (200 to 400 IU q24h), or combinations thereof resolved the lesions in the dogs,
but relapses typically followed drug withdrawal.
Skin biopsy findings vary from case to case but typically show apoptosis of the basal
layer of the epidermis, pigmentary incontinence, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and ischemic
degeneration of the hair follicles. These changes are more typical of canine systemic lupus
erythematosus or dermatomyositis than primary vasculitis. If these findings are coupled
with the postvaccinal onset of lesions in three of the five dogs, other causes of vasculitis
should be considered before attributing the disorder to a genetic abnormality (see
Chap. 9).

FIGURE 12-79. Continued A, Hereditary pyogranulomatous disease with vasculitis in Scottish terriers. Bilateral ulceration of the nostrils. B, Hereditary pyogranulomatous disease with vasculitis in Scottish terriers. Focal ulcerated granulomas,
depigmentation, and loss of the surface architecture of the nasal planum. C, Congenitallyrnphedema in a dog. The hindleg
is swollen and edematous, and pits easily. D, Lethal acrodermatitis in a bull terrier. Erythema, alopecia, and peeling skin on
the face. E, Lethal acrodermatitis in a bull terrier. Hyperkeratotic footpads and pedal erythema. F, Canine tyrosinemia.
Depigmentation and ulceration of the nose. (Courtesy G.A. Kunkle.) G, Canine tyrosinemia. Ulceration of footpads.
(Courtesy of G. A. Kunkle.) H, Acral mutilation in an English pointer.

990 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-80. Hereditary pyogranulomatous disease with vasculitis in Scottish terriers. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis surrounded by
pyogranulomatous dermatitis.

Lymphedema
Lymphedema is swelling of some part of the body due to abnormal lymph flow.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Lymphedema can be primary or secondary.P": 203, 206 Primary lymphedema is caused by
developmental defects in lymphatics and lymph nodes. Secondary lymphedema results
from the obstruction of lymphatics or lymphatic flow by inflammatory or neoplastic
disease, surgery, or trauma. In some dogs, primary lymphedema has been shown to be
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable expressivity.w- 205, 206, 208 Canine
primary lymphedema has been classified by lymphangiography and histopathologic
study into two basic structural defects: (1) lymphatic hypoplasia, with or without hypoplasia or absence of the regional lymph nodes, and (2) lymphatic hyperplasia and dilatation.201. 202, 205
Decreased transport capacity of the lymphatic system leads to an increase in proteinrich interstitial fluid. 211 Such lymphostasis affects the other two members of the dermal
microcirculation as well, so that arterial and venous blood vessels are damaged (lymphostatic hemangiopathy). The tissues become infiltrated by inflammatory cells; the activated
vascular endothelial cells and the dermal inflammatory cells release mediators acting on
epidermal and dermal structures; the dermal connective tissue elements, ground substance, microfilaments, collagen, and elastic fibers are damaged; and angiogenic factors
from vascular endothelial cells and inflammatory cells contribute to vascular proliferation.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Primary lymphedema has been recognized in the cat 203 and in several breeds of dogs,
including the English bulldog (Fig. 12-81), German shepherd, Borzoi, Belgian Tervuren,
Old English sheepdog, Labrador retriever, Great Dane, Poodle, and Old English sheepdog-Labrador retriever crosses.s'"- 204 There appears to be no sex predilection. The onset
of disease is usually within the first 12 weeks of life.
The hind limbs are the most commonly affected, although the front limbs, the
ventrum, the tail, and the pinnae may be involved.F" Affected skin is usually normal in
surface appearance but is thickened and spongy and pits with digital pressure (see Fig.
12-79C). The swollen skin is not warm, tender, or inflamed. Regional lymph nodes may
not be palpable, and the animals are usually healthy otherwise. Disturbed antigen recognition and pathways into lymphatics results in altered immunosurveillance, thus predisposing

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 991

FIGURE 12-81. Congenital lymphedema in an English bulldog.
(Courtesy of J. King.)

to infections and malignancy."! Because lymphedema predisposes affected tissues to
secondary bacterial infection and delayed healing, these complications may be clinically
apparent.
DIAGNOSIS

Differential diagnosis includes other causes of obstructive, inflammatory, and hypoproteinemic edema. Definitive diagnosis is based on history, physical examination findings,
laboratory tests to rule out other conditions, skin biopsy, patent blue violet dye test, and
lymphangiography.202 In the dye test, the solution is injected subcutaneously into the foot
of the affected limb. In animals with primary lymphedema, the purplish discoloration
persists for extended periods of time. 203 Skin biopsy reveals variable degrees of subcutaneous and dermal edema.v" Lymphatics may be dilated (Fig. 12-82) and hyperplastic, or
they may be hypoplastic. Perilymphatic fibroblasts are increased, extravasated erythrocytes
and their remnants are visible, and fragmentation and degeneration of collagen and elastic
fibers ensues with chronic lymphedema. Chronic cases may involve variable degrees of
fibrosis and epidermal hyperplasia. Inflammatory cells are usually few and include lympho-

FIGURE 12-82. Lymphedema.
Note the marked dilatation of the
superficial-, mid-, and deep-dermal
lymphatics.

992 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
cytes, macrophages (often containing lipid droplets), plasma cells, and mast cells. Changes
of secondary infection may be present (Fig. 12-83).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The prognosis and the indicated therapy vary with the severity of the lymphedema.v"
Mild cases may wax and wane, spontaneously regress, or persist indefinitely with no
adverse consequences to the patient. More severe cases may require (1) frequent bandaging (e.g., modified Robert Jones splint) to reduce the lymphedema.s'" (2) surgical extirpation of the edematous tissues, (3) reconstructive surgery, or (4) amputation of the affected
part. No successful form of medical management has been reported for dogs. The benzopyrene group of drugs has proven benefit in humans. 202 Good attention to skin care and
hygiene and control of infections is essential. Dogs with severe primary lymphedema often
die shortly after birth because of pleural and abdominal effusions.P"

• ENDOCRINE, METABOLIC, AND IMMUNOLOGIC DISORDERS
Endocrine, metabolic, or immunologic diseases can occur in any animal. Certain breeds or
specific families within a breed are at greater risk for a particular disease, suggesting a
heritable influence. The reader is referred to Chapters 8, 9, and 10 for a complete
discussion of these disorders. The disorders discussed subsequently have each been recognized in only one breed of dog and therefore are included in this chapter.

Acrodermatitis
Acrodermatitis has been reported as an inherited, autosomal recessive trait that produces
a lethal syndrome in Bull terriers.v'' 218, 221 The clinical, pathologic, and genetic features of
the syndrome resemble acrodermatitis enteropathica in humans, lethal trait A46 in Black
Pied Danish cattle, and experimental zinc deficiency in dogs. Although affected Bull
terriers had Significantly lowered serum and liver concentrations of zinc and copper, they
did not respond to high-dose zinc replacement therapy.P" 221.222 The specific cause of the
condition is as yet incompletely defined, but affected dogs have defective zinc and copper
metabolism. 22o , 221 It is unknown whether both trace mineral deficiencies exist independent
of each other or whether one causes the other. 222

FIGURE 12-83. Lymphedema
with a secondary lymphangitis.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 993

CLINICAL FEATURES
At birth, affected pups have skin pigmentation that is lighter than normal, and the coat in
some dogs is dull, brittle, and fluffy.215 The pups are weaker than their normallittermates,
and they cannot chew or swallow well because of their high-arched hard palate. Their
growth is retarded.F" By 6 weeks of age, their feet are splayed, the footpads are cracked,
and crusted skin lesions appear between the toes. Ulcerated, exudative crusted lesions are
also found on the ears and the muzzle (see Fig. 12-79D). Papular or pustular dermatitis
may be found around all body orifices but most notably around those of the head. The
foot lesions (see Fig. 12-79E) progress rapidly to severe interdigital pyoderma and
paronychia. Later, there is onychodystrophyv'" and frondlike keratinization of the noncontact areas of the footpads. Generalized bacterial folliculitis may develop, being most severe
in areas prone to frictional trauma, such as the elbows and the hocks. Affected animals
may have diarrhea and respiratory infections with chronic nasal discharges. At weaning
time, they appear especially aggressive, but by 14 to 16 weeks, they become less active,
less responsive to external stimuli, and sleep a great deal. Many have ocular abnormalities.
The average survival time is 7 months, but conventional treatments may prolong this time.

DIAGNOSIS
If multiple puppies are presented at one time, no other differential diagnoses are appropriate. In individual cases, drug eruption, pemphigus foliaceus, and staphylococcal or
Malassezia infection secondary to some congenital immunodeficiency may be considered.
There is a high incidence (75% to 100%) of secondary yeast infection in Bull terriers with
acrodermatitis.P'f 219 Skin biopsies should be performed in all cases.
Histopathology shows diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with focal crusting and intraepidermal pustules." The superficial epidermis may show laminar pallor as occurs in
necrolytic migratory erythema (see Chap. 10), but the keratinocytes are viable and not
degenerating. Lymphocytes are severely reduced in T-cell areas of lymphoid tissues,
Routine laboratory tests show no consistent abnormalities specific for this disorder. 21G, 221 Serum or liver levels of zinc and copper may be low or normal. 21G, 220, 221
Malassezia yeasts can be isolated in most cases by scraping, on acetate tape preparations,
or by biopsy.215, 219

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Efforts to return these dogs to normal status with oral or parenteral zinc supplementation
have been unrewarding.P-" 221 Treatment with systemic antibiotics resolves cutaneous and
systemic infections, but provides no long-term solution because infections return. If Malassezia infection is present, the administration of ketoconazole (10 mglkg ql2h) results in
marked improvement.P" One animal has been maintained well for nearly 2 years with
ketoconazole.
Parents of affected dogs are carriers for the disorder, as are more than half of the
clinically normal siblings of affected dogs. No relatives of the affected dogs should be
used for breeding. Some of the apparently normal littermates may experience zincresponsive dermatitis (see Chap. 17).

Tyrosinemia
A single case of congenital tyrosinemia in a young dog has been reported."? It appeared
to be similar to tyrosinemia type II in humans or pseudodistemper in mink. Tyrosinemia,
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, is a group of distinct metabolic diseases with five
phenotypes in humans.s The case reported in the dog was characterized by early-onset
characteristic eye and skin lesions with varying degrees of mental retardation.

994 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

The tyrosinemia in the dog was apparently hereditary because both parents had elevated
serum tyrosine levels. The serum tyrosine levels were elevated because of the deficiency
of cytosolic hepatic tyrosine aminotransferase. The pathophysiologic change is considered
an inflammatory response to tyrosine crystals deposited in tissues. This appears to be the
case with the corneal lesions, but many skin lesions have no crystals. Instead, there may
be increased numbers of highly condensed tonofibrils and increased numbers of keratohyaline granules in the granular layer. Tyrosine is known to influence the number of
microtubules in the tonofibrils.
CLINICAL FEATURES

The 7-week-old German shepherd puppy was small for its age when it first had conjunctivitis and cloudy corneas. The globes were small, and cataracts and corneal granulation
were present, but there was no ulceration. There was ulceration of the nose, tongue, and
central portions of the footpads (see Fig. 12-79F and G). As the disease progressed,
ulcers involved the metatarsal pads and the claw folds, and claws were broken. Erythematous bullae were found on the abdomen. The nasal planum was affected by erythema,
focal ulceration with marginal crusting, and hypopigmentation.
DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of a metabolic defect was suspected because of the historical and physical
examination findings and confirmed by metabolic screening tests. High levels of tyrosine
in the serum and urine were identified.
Histopathologic examination of ulcerated skin lesions revealed pyogranulomatous inflammation associated with large, dark-brown granules (110 to 170 mm in diameter) of
tyrosine (Fig. 12-84) surrounded by an eosinophilic, amorphous material, which resembled the Splendore-Hoeppli reaction. The granules gave a positive orange reaction when
stained with Millon's reaction for tyrosine.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

The prognosis for a cure is not good. In humans, dramatic reduction of plasma tyrosine
levels with subsequent clearing of skin and eye lesions occurs in patients receiving diets

FIGURE 12-84. Tyrosinemia. Tyrosine granules surrounded by pyogranulomatous inflammation.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 995
low in tyrosine and phenylalanine. Symptoms recur when a regular diet is resumed.
Dietary manipulation also resulted in clearing of the dog's skin lesions.

• MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Acral Mutilation Syndrome
Acral mutilation and analgesia is an unusual hereditary sensory neuropathy of dogs that
results in progressive mutilation of the distal extremities.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

The disorder has been reported in German shorthaired pointers.P" English springer
spaniel.F" and English pointer dogs. It is probably inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. 226 , 227 Pathologic lesions are identified at the level of the primary sensory neuron.
Necropsy changes occur grossly as a decrease in prominence of the spinal ganglia and
dorsal roots. The nerve cell bodies of the subcapsular mantle zone are decreased in
number (by 22% to 50%), and the neuron mantle is decreased in thickness. The number
of small neurons (20 /-Lm or less) in the affected ganglia is disproportionately increased in
affected dogs. The spinal cord changes occur in the dorsolateral fasciculus, where reduced
fiber density correlates well with the loss of pain perception that is clinically apparent.
Light- and electron-microscopic examinations of spinal roots, ganglia, and peripheral
nerves show myelinated and unmyelinated fiber degeneration. Neuronal degeneration does
not account for the deficiency of sensory cell bodies. This mutilation acropathy is a
manifestation of a sensory neuropathy in which the neuronal deficiency results from
insufficient development and slowly progressive postnatal degeneration. 224
CLINICAL FEATURES

The syndrome appears first in affected pups at 3 to 5 months of age. Both sexes and more
than one pup per litter may be affected. The pups may be smaller than littermates. They
begin to bite and lick their paws. There is total loss of temperature and pain sensation in
the toes and sometimes in the proximal legs and trunk. Usually, the hind legs are most
severely involved, and occasionally only the toes of the rear legs are affected.
The toes and feet become swollen, and the skin of the footpads, the plantar surface,
and the area over the tuber calcis may be ulcerated. Paronychia is present, and autoamputation of the toes may be noted. The puppies walk unflinchingly on the mutilated feet (see
Fig. 12-79H). Proprioception is normal, tendon reflexes are intact, and no motor or
autonomic impairment is present. EMG studies reveal no denervation potentials.
DIAGNOSIS

History and a thorough clinical examination of puppies of predisposed breeds provides a
presumptive diagnosis. Histopathologic examination of nerve tissues at necropsy establishes
a definitive diagnOSis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Attempts to prevent further mutilation by means of bandages, restraint collars, or sedation
are of little benefit, and euthanasia is usually requested by the owners.
The hereditary aspects of this syndrome are important because it has been seen in
several strains of English pointers." Parents of affected pups should not be used as
breeders. Siblings should not be used either until the mode of inheritance is firmly
established. Even then, the breeding of siblings should probably be discouraged unless
some test is developed to identify carriers of the disorder.

996 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
Persistent Scratching in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
A neurogenic pruritus has been described in young adult Cavalier King Charles spaniels.
Magnetic resonance imaging studies showed cerebellar tonsil herniation with syringohydromyelia.F"- 232, 232. The disorder has been likened to the Chiari type I malformation in
humans. With the young age at onset and apparent uniqueness of this condition to this
breed, a familial basis is probable.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Affected dogs are presented for pruritus of the shoulder or neck region starting between
6 and 24 months of age. One or both sides may be involved. The pruritus interferes with
normal activity and can be triggered or exacerbated by excitement, wearing of a collar, or
manipulation of the area. On physical examination, no primary skin lesions are visible and
the dog has lower motor neuron deficits of the ipsilateral thoracic limb,

TREATMENT
Surgical procedures to alleviate the herniation should be beneficial. Medications to reduce
cerebrospinal fluid production can be useful; response has occurred in some dogs treated
with dexamethasone (0.25 mg/dog q24h) and acetazolamide (3 mglkg q8h). Clinical signs
improve but do not disappear. Some dogs are stable over long periods of time with no
treatment.232.

Cutaneous Mucinosis
Mucin is a component of the normal dermal ground substance." Excessive accumulation,
be it focal, regionalized, or generalized, can occur in hypothyroidism, acromegaly, alopecia
mucinosa, dermatomyositis, or discoid lupus erythematosus.v" or it can be idiopathic.P"
The Chinese Shar pei is prone to the latter (see Chap. 18).225,229
Shar peis have more dermal mucin than do other breeds.!'" 225 Some dogs have
exaggerated amounts and exhibit pronounced folding (see Fig. 18-58A), mucinous vesiculation (see Fig. 18-58B), or both. The exaggerated folding is most pronounced on the
head, the ventrum, and the distal extremities, and some of these dogs snore and snort
owing to involvement of tissues in the oropharynx. The vesicles vary in size and can occur
in normal-appearing or edematous skin.
Recent studies in Shar peis with idiopathic mucinosis show that distorted lymphatics,
massive accumulations of hyaluronic acid, and mast cells of the chymase-carboxypeptidase
subtype are features of this disorder (see Chap. 18).

DIAGNOSIS
The tentative diagnosis of diffuse mucinosis is based on clinical findings of exaggerated
folds and is confirmed by skin biopsy, in which the dermis contains excessive mucin with
no other abnormalities.P" 223, 228 Visually, the vesicles mimic those of the various autoimmune and immune-mediated disorders, but clinical evaluation of the vesicles' contents
quickly identifies the mucinous nature of the fluid. Mucinous vesicles do not discharge
fluid with puncture by a small-gauge needle. The fluid must be expressed by digital
pressure and then is thick, clear, and sticky, Biopsy of these lesions shows focal accumulation of mucin in the superficial dermis. To date, the mucinosis in Shar peis has occurred
in euthyroid dogs. Because this breed is prone to hypothyroidism,229 an intercurrent
thyroid abnormality could lead to severe mucinosis.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
In most cases, the excessive mucinosis in Shar peis is a cosmetic problem only. Most
animals seem to outgrow it by 2 to 5 years of age. 225 Dogs with oropharyngeal involve-

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 997

ment may warrant treatment because they can experience respiratory arrest with anesthesia.229 High levels of prednisolone (2.2 mglkg) for 6 days, followed by a slow reduction to
no medication in 30 days, should reduce the amount of mucin. 225 Most animals remain
normal after only one course of treatment. A few dogs require repeated or continuous
treatment. These dogs should be evaluated for hypothyroidism.

Urticaria Pigmentosa
In humans, a mastocytosis syndrome is recognized wherein mast cell hyperplasia occurs in
the skin and virtually all other organ systems.s Urticaria pigmentosa is the most common
cutaneous manifestation of mastocytosis and is characterized by variably symptomatic,
small, yellow-tan to reddish-brown macules or papules. Urticaria pigmentosa has been
recognized in the dog, described in detail in three related Sphinx cats,233 briefly described
in young (younger than 1 year old) Himalayan cats," reported in two unrelated Devon Rex
cats,230 and seen in a young Siamese cat by one of the authors (DWS).

CLINICAL FEATURES
All three Sphinx cats had the same grands ire and started their disease early in life (see
Chap. 13). The cats had a multifocal, partially coalescing macular and crusted papular rash
on the head and neck, ventrum (Fig. 12-86), and extremities. Some of the lesions were
dark brown. Dermatographism could not be elicited in any cat.
The Himalayan cats had asymptomatic macular erythema and hyperpigmentation
around the mouth, chin, neck, and eyes. The condition resolved spontaneously after
several months.
The Siamese cat had erythema, hyperpigmentation, scaling, crusting, and pruritus
involving the face and pinnae (Fig. 12-85).

DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of a familial history, all causes of crusted papular lesions in cats (miliary
dermatitis-see Chap. 8) must be considered. Skin biopsies show moderate-to-severe,
perivascular-to-diffuse dermal and subcutaneous infiltrate of well-differentiated mast cells
with small numbers of eosinophils and neutrophils. Epidermal melanosis may be prominent. All three Sphinx cats had peripheral eosinophilia and basophilia, but no internal
organ involvement could be identified.

FIGURE 12-85. Urticaria pigmentosa. Siamese cat with facial
crusted papular rash.

998 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects

FIGURE 12-86. Urticaria pigmentosa, Ventral papular rash on a Sphinx
cat. (Courtesy of C. Vitale.)

TREATMENT

Because the mast cell hyperplasia in urticaria pigmentosa has either a familial or an
idiopathic basis, cure cannot always be expected. Treatment with corticosteroids with or
without antihistamines controls the lesions in Sphinx and Siamese cats while the drugs are
being administered.

• REFERENCES
General References
1. Foil CS: The skin. In Hoskins JD (ed): Veterinary
Pediatrics, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1995.
2. Freedberg 1M, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw Hill Book Co,
New York, 1999.
3. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. Mosby
Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
4. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: The use of synthetic retinoids in
veterinary medicine. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1995, p. 585.
5. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.

Disorders ofthe Surface and Follicular Epithelium
6. Alhaidari Z, et al: Congenital ichthyosis in two Cavalier King Charles spaniel littermates. Vet Dermatol 5:
117, 1994.
7. Antin IP: Dermoid sinus in a Rhodesian Ridge-back
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:961, 1970.
8. August JR, et al: Congenital ichthyosis in a dog:
Comparison with the human ichthyosiform dermatoses. Comp Cont Educ 10:40, 1988.
9. Baker BB, Maibach HI: Epidermal cell renewal in
seborrheic skin of dogs. Am J Vet Res 48:726, 1987.
10. Bensignor E: A propos d'une observation de dermatomyosite chez un beauceron. Rec Med Vet 173:125,
1997.

lOa. Binder H, et al: Palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in Irish
terriers: Evidence of autosomal recessive inheritance.
J Small Anim Pract 41:52, 2000.
11. Bond R, et al: An idiopathic facial dermatitis of Persian cats. Vet Dermatol 11:35, 2000.
12. Booth MJ: Atypical dermoid sinus in a chow show
dog. Tydskr S Afr Vet Ver 69:102, 1998.
13. Bourdeau P: La dermataomyosite familiale canine.
Point vet 28:553, 1996.
14. Burrows A, Mason KV: Observations of the pathogenesis and treatment of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatitis of springer spaniels. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl Vet Dermatol 10:81,
1994.
14a. Camacho AA, et al: Dermoid sinus in a Great Pyrenees dog. Braz J Vet Res Anim Sci 32:170, 1995.
15. Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils on
transepidermal water loss with seborrhea sicca. In
Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993,
p 157.
16. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of four anti-seborrheic
shampoos on transepidermal water losses, hydration
of the stratum comeum, skin surface lipid concentration, skin surface pH, and comeocyte counts in dogs.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
CoIl Vet Dermatol 10:85, 1994.
17. Comegliani L, Ghibaudo G: A dermoid sinus in a
Siberian husky. Vet Dermatol 10:47, 1999.
18. Credille KM, et al: Heterogeneity in nonepidermolytic ichthyosis in a cat and two dogs. In Kwochka KW,

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 999
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 529.
19. Dunstan RW, et al: A disease resembling junctional
epidermolysis bullosa in a toy poodle. Am J Dermatopathol 10:442, 1988.
20. Fadok VA: Treatment of canine idiopathic seborrhea
with isotretinoin. Am J Vet Res 47:1730, 1986.
21. Fatone G, et al: Dermoid sinus and spinal malformations in a Yorkshire terrier: Diagnosis and follow-up.
J Small Anim Pract 36:178, 1995.
21a. Ferguson EA, et al: Dermatomyositis in five Shetland sheepdogs in the United Kingdom. Vet Rec 146:
214,2000.
22. Fontaine J, et al: Familial junctional epidermolysis
bullosa in Beauceron dogs. Vet Dermatol (In press).
23. Gammie JS: Dermoid sinus removal in a Rhodesian
ridgeback dog. Can Vet J 27:250, 1986.
24. Gordon JG, Kwochka KW: Corneocyte counts for
evaluation of antiseborrheic shampoos in dogs. Vet
Dermatol 4:57, 1993.
25. Gross TL, et al: Psoriasiform lichenoid dermatitis in
the springer spaniel. Vet Pathol 23:76, 1986.
26. Ouaguere E, et al: Epidermolyse bulleuse jonctionelle
familale associee a une absence d'expression de collagene XVII (BPAG2, BP180) chez Ie Brague Allemand: A propos de deux case. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 32:471, 1997.
27. Cuaguere E, et al: Familial canine dermatomyositis in
8 Beauceron shepherds. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 527.
28. Gupta BN: Epitheliogenesis imperfecta in a dog. Am
J Res 34:443, 1973.
29. Hannigan MM: A refractory case of Schnauzer comedo syndrome. Can Vet J 38:238, 1997.
30. Hargis AM, et al: A skin disorder in three Shetland
sheepdogs: Comparison with familial canine dermatomyositis of Collies. Comp Cont Educ 7:306, 1985.
31. Hargis AM, Mundell AC: Familial canine dermatomyositis. Comp Cont Educ 14:855, 1992.
32. Hargis AM, et al: Complement levels in dogs with
familial canine dermatomyositis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 20:95, 1985.
33. Hargis AM, et al: Severe secondary amyloidosis in a
dog with dermatomyositis. J Comp Pathol 100:427,
1989.
34. Helman RG, et al: Ichthyosiform dermatosis in a softcoated wheaten terrier. Vet Dermatol 8:53, 1997.
35. Hewitt MP, et al: Epitheliogenesis imperfecta in a
black Labrador puppy. Can Vet J 16:371, 1975.
36. Ihrke PJ, Gross TL: Ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland
sheepdogs and Collies. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1995, p 639.
37. Iwasaki T, et al: Canine familial dermatomyositis in a
family of Shetland sheepdogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Deramtol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
15:15, 1999.
38. Jackson HA, Olivry T: Cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ulcerative dermatitis) in the Shetland sheepdog
and collie: A review and revelation of the clinical and
histological features. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:31,
1999.
39. Johnstone I, et al: A hereditary junctional mechanobullous disease in the cat. Proc Wid Cong Vet Dermatol 2:111, 1992.
39a. Kimura T, Doi K: Dorsal skin reactions of hairless

dogs to topical treatment with corticosteroids. Toxicol
Pathol 27:528, 1999.
40. Koch H, Walder E: Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophia
in Beaucerons. In von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1.
Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 441.
41. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Comparative Dermatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,
1964.
42. Kwochka KW: Shampoos and moisturizing rinses in
veterinary dermatology. In Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1995, p 590.
43. Kwochka KW: Keratinization abnormalities: Understanding the mechanism of scale formation. In Ihrke
PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 91.
44. Kwochka KW: Cell proliferation kinetics in the hair
root matrix of dogs with healthy skin and dogs with
idiopathic seborrhea. Am J Vet Res 51:1570, 1990.
45. Kwochka KW: In vivo and in vitro examination of cell
proliferation kinetics in the normal and seborrheic
canine epidermis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 7:46, 1991.
46. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of
epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of beagles and Cocker spaniels with healthy skin. Am J Vet
Res 50:587, 1989.
47. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation kinetics of epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous
glands of Cocker spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea.
Am J Vet Res 50:1918, 1989.
48. Kwochka KW, Smeak DD: The cellular defect in idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker spaniels. In von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology, Vol 1. Balliere Tindall, Philadelphia,
1990, p 265.
49. Kwochka KW, et al: Development and characterization of an in vitro cell culture system for the canine
epidermis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 3:9, 1987.
50. Kwochka KW: Advances in the management of canine scaling. Proceedings of the Third World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology, 1996, p 69.
50a. Lanore D, et al: Sinus dennoide chez une chienne
rhodesian ridgeback. Point Vet 30:575, 1999.
51. Lewis DT, et al: Characterization and management of
a Jack Russell terrier with congenital ichthyosis. Vet
Dermatol 9:111, 1998.
52. Lewis DT, et al: A hereditary disorder of cornification
and multiple congenital defects in 5 Rottweiler dogs.
Vet Dermatol 9:61, 1998.
53. Lumbrechts N: Dermoid sinus in a crossbred Rhodesian ridgeback dog involving the second cervical vertebra. J S Afr Vet Assoc 67:155, 1996.
,54. Mann GE, Stratton J: Dermoid sinus in the Rhodesian ridgeback. J Small Anim Pract 7:631, 1966.
55. Mason KV, et al: Characterization of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis of springer spaniels. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 189:897, 1986.
56. Miller WH Jr: Canine facial dermatoses. Comp Cont
Educ 1:640, 1979.
57. Muller GH: Ichthyosis in two dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 169:1313, 1976.
58. Munday BL: Epitheliogenesis imperfecta in lambs
and kittens. Br Vet J 126:47, 1970.
59. Nagata M, et al: Dystrophic form of inherited epider-

I 000 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
molysis bullosa in a dog (Akita Inu). Br J Dermatol
133:1000, 1995.
60. Nagata M, et al: Mitis junctional epidermolysis bullosa in a dog. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 528.
61. Nakayama H, et al: Systemic dermal dysplasia with
perifollicular mucinosis in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:5,
1997.
62. Nuttall TJ: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim
Pract 39:317, 1998.
63. Olivry T, et al: Absent expression of collagen XVII
(BPAG2, BP180) in canine familial localized junctional epidermolysis bullosa. Vet Dermatol 8:203,
1997.
64. Olivry T, et al: Canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita: Circulating autoantibodies target the aminoterminal noncollagenous (NCl) domain of collagen VII
in anchoring fibrils. Vet Dermatol 9:19, 1998.
65. Olivry T, Mason IS: Genodermatoses: inheritance and
management. In Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 365.
66. Olivry T, et al: Interface dermatitis and sebaceous
adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
(Tupoid dermatosis") of German shorthaired pointers.
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 15:41, 1999.
66a. Olivry T, et al: Reduced anchoring fibril formation
and collagen VII immunoreactivity in feline dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Vet Pathol 36:616,
1999.
67. Page N, et al: Hereditary nasal hyperkeratosis in Labrador retrievers. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad
Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 15:41, 1999.
68. Palshof P, Christoffersen E: Malassezia pachqdermaus
on the skin of normal and seborrheic West Highland
white terriers. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 10:269,
1993.
69. Paradis M, Scott DW: Hereditary primary seborrhea
oleosa in Persian cats. Feline Pract 19:17, 1990.
70. Paradis M: Footpad hyperkeratosis in a family of Dogues de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol 3:75, 1992.
71. Paradis M: Les seborrhees primaires hereditaires.
Point Vet 28:559, 1996.
72. Penrith ML: Dermoid sinus in a Boerboel bitch. J S
Afr Vet Assoc 65:38, 1998.
73. Power HT, et al: Use of etretinate for treatment of
primary keratinization disorders (idiopathic seborrhea)
in Cocker spaniels, West Highland white terriers, and
Basset hounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:419, 1992.
74. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.
Proc Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 14:27, 1998.
74a. Pratt IN, et al: Dermoid sinus at the lumbosacral
junction in an English springer spaniel. J Small Anim
Pract 41:24, 2000.
75. Raczkowski JJ: Pathogenetic Studies of Canine Seborrheic Skin Disease in the West Highland White Terrier Breed. Masters thesis, Kansas State University,
1984.
76. Rest JR, Theaker AJ: Lupoid dermatosis in a German
shorthaired pointer. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 10:
271, 1993.
77. Scott DW, Schultz RD: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
in a collie dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 171:721, 1977.
78. Scott DW: Congenital ichthyosis in a dog. Compan
Anim Pract 19:7, 1987.

79. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Epidermal dysplasia and
Malassezia pachqdermatis infection in West Highland
white terriers. Vet Dermatol 1:25, 1989.
80. Scott DW, Miller WHo Primary seborrhoea in English
springer spaniels: A retrospective study of 14 cases.
J Small Anim Pract 37:173, 1996.
81. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Congenital follicular parakeratosis in a Rottweiler and Siberian husky. Canine
Pract (in press, 1999).
82. Selcer EA, et al: Dermoid sinus in a Shih tzu and a
boxer. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:634, 1984.
83. Shanley KJ, et al: Canine benign familial chronic
pemphigus. In Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p 353.
84. Stonecipher MR, et al: Cutaneous changes of dermatomyositis in patients with normal muscle enzymes.
Dermatomyositis sine myositis? J Am Acad Dermatol
28:951, 1993.
84a. Sueki H, et al: Dominantly inherited epidermal
acantholysis in dogs, simulating human benign familial
chronic pemphigus. Br J Dermatol 136:190, 1996.
85. Tada J, Hashimoto K: Ultrastructural localization of
cell junctional components (desmoglein, phakoglobin,
E-cadherin, and B-catenin) in Hailey-Hailey disease,
Darier's disease, and pemphigus vulgaris. J Cutan
Pathol 25:106, 1998.
86. Theaker AJ: A case of lupoid dermatosis in a German
short-haired pointer. Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study
Grp 16:5, 1994.
87. Vercelli A, Schiavi S: A case report of lupoid dermatosis in a German short-haired pointer. In Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 466.
88. Vroom MW: A retrospective study of 43 West
Highland white terriers. Proc Wid Cong Vet Dermatol 2:70, 1992.
89. Vroom MW: Three cases with hereditary lupoid dermatosis of the German shorthaired pointer. Proc Eur
Soc Vet Dermatol 10:67, 1993.
90. Vroom MW, et al: Lupoid dermatosis in 5 German
short-haired pointers. Vet Dermatol 6:93, 1995.
91. White SD, Gross TL: Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of
the German shorthaired pointer. In Bonagura JD
(ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
92. White SD, et al: Dermatomyositis in an adult Pembroke Welsh corgi. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:398,
1992.
93. White SD, et al: Dystrophic (dermolytic) epidermolysis bullosa in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4:91, 1993.

Disorders ofHairs and Hair Growth
94. Allen LSS: Skin condition in Yorkshire terriers. Canine Pract 12:29, 1985.
95. Bagladi MS, et al: Sebaceous gland melanosis in dogs
with endocrine skin disease or follicular dysplasia: A
retrospective study. Vet Dermatol 7:85, 1996.
96. Beco L, et al: Color dilution alopecia in seven Dachshunds: A clinical study and the hereditary, microscopical, and ultrastructural aspect of the disease. Vet
Dermatol 7:91, 1996.
97. Bourdeau P, et al: Alopecic hereditaire generalisee
feline. Rec Med Vet 164:17, 1988.
98. Brignac M, et al: Microscopy of color mutant alopecia. In von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere
Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 448.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • 100I
99. Carlotti D: A propos des alopecies auriculaires. Point
Vet 25:8, 1993.
100. Carlotti DN: Canine hereditary black hair follicular
dysplasia and color mutant alopecia: Clinical and histopathological aspects. In von Tschamer C, Halliwell
REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol
1. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 43.
101. Casal ML, et al: X-linked ectodermal dysplasia in the
dog. J Heredity 88:513, 1997.
102. Casal ML, et al: Congenital hypotrichosis with thymic
aplasia in nine Birman kittens. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:600, 1994.
102a. Castellano MC: Colour dilution alopecia in a
German shepherd dog. Canine Pract 24:6, 1999.
103. Cerundolo R, et al: Studies on the inheritance of hair
loss in the Irish water spaniel. Proc Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet DermatoI14:95, 1998.
104. Chastain CB, Sawyer DE: Congenital hypotrichosis in
male Basset hound littermates. J Am Vet Med Assoc
187:845, 1985.
105. Conroy JD: Hypotrichosis in miniature poodle siblings. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166:697, 1975.
106. Cowan LA, et al: Thyroid hormone and testosterone
concentrations in racing greyhounds with and without
bald thigh syndrome. J Vet Int Med 11:142, 1997.
107. Curtis CF, et al: Investigation of the reproductive and
growth hormone status of dogs affected by idiopathic
recurrent flank alopecia. J Small Anim Pract 37;417,
1966.
108. Delmage D: Black hair follicular dysplasia. Vet Rec
137:79, 1995.
109. Dunn KA, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia in
dogs. Vet Rec 137:412, 1995.
110. Dunstan RW, Rosser EJ: Newly recognized and
emerging genodermatoses in domestic animals. Curr
Probl Dermatol 17:216, 1987.
111. Fontaine J, et al: Alopecie recidivante des flances:
Etude de douze cas chez Ie griffon "Korthals." Point
vet 29:445, 1998.
l l Ia, Fontaine J, Olivry T: Alopecie evoquant une ltpidose
folliculaire chez un Rottweiler. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 34:681, 1999.
ll1b. Fukata K, et al: Microscopic observation of skin and
lymphoid organs in the hairless dog derived from the
Mexican hairless. Exper Anim 40:69, 1991.
112. Geary MR, Baker KP: The occurrence of pili torti in
a litter of kittens in England. J Small Anim Pract 27:
85, 1986.
113. Grieshaber TL, et al: Congenital alopecia in a Bichon
frise. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1053, 1986.
114. Griffin CE: Etretinate-how is it being used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialogue, Spring/Summer
1993, p 4.
115. Gross TL, et al: Follicular lipidosis in three Rottweilers. Vet Dermatol 8:33, 1997.
116. Cuaguere E: Aspects histopathologiques et ultrastructuraux de l'alopecie des robes diluees: A propos d'un
cos chez un Doberman pinscher bleu. Prat Med Chirurg Anim Cie 26:537, 1991.
117. Cuaguere E: Les alopecies d'ortgme genetique chez
Ie chien. Point Vet 28:543, 1996.
118. Hargis AM, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia in
black and white Saluki dogs. Vet Dermatol 2:69,
1991.
119. Hirota Y, et al: Immunologic features in hairless descendants derived from Mexican hairless dogs. Jpn J
Vet Sci 52:1217, 1990.

120. Ihrke PJ, et al: Generalized congenital hypotrichosis
in a female Rottweiler. Vet Dermatol 4:65, 1993.
121. Johnson PD, et al: Coat color darkening in a dog in
response to a potent melanotropic peptide. Small
Anim Clin EndocrinoI5:1, 1995.
122. Kimura T, et al: The inheritance and breeding results
of hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Lab
Anim 27:55, 1993.
123. Kimura T, Doi K: The effect of topical minoxidil
treatment on hair follicular growth of neonatal hairless descendants of Mexican hairless dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:107, 1997.
124. Kimura T, Doi K: Age-related changes in skin color
and histologic features of hairless descendants of
Mexican hairless dogs. Am J Vet Res 55:480, 1994.
125. Knottenbelt CM, Knottenbelt MK: Black hair follicular dysplasia in a tricolour Jack Russell terrier. Vet
Rec 138:475, 1996.
126. Kral F, Schwartzman RM: Veterinary and Comparative Dermatology. I.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,
1964.
127. Krishnaswamy Y, et al: Pharmacokinetics and oral
bioavailability of exogenous melatonin in preclinical
animal models and clinical implications. J Pineal Res
22:45, 1997.
128. Kunkle GA: Congenital hypotrichosis in two dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:84, 1984.
129. Lewis CJ: Black hair follicular dysplasia in UK bred
salukis. Vet Rec 137:294, 1995.
130. McKeever PJ, et al: Spiculosis. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 28:257, 1992.
131. Madewell BR, et al: Multiple skin tumours in a Doberman pinscher with colour dilution alopecia. Vet
Dermatol 8:59, 1997.
132. Malik R, France MP: Hyperpigmentation and symmetrical alopecia in three Silky terriers. Aust Vet
Pract 21:135, 1991.
133. Marks A, et al: Congenital hypotrichosis in a French
bulldog. J Small Anim Pract 33:450, 1992.
134. Miller MA, Dunstan RW: Seasonal flank alopecia in
boxers and Airedale terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1567, 1993.
135. Miller WH Jr: Follicular dysplasia in adult black and
red Doberman pinschers. Vet Dermatoll:181, 1990.
136. Miller WH Jr: Color dilution alopecia in Doberman
pinschers with blue or fawn coat colors: A study on
the incidence and histopathology of this disorder. Vet
Dermatol 1:113, 1990.
137. Miller WH Jr: Alopecia associated with coat color
dilution in two Yorkshire terriers, one Saluki, and one
mix-breed dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:39, 1991.
138. Miller WH Jr, Scott DW: Follicular dysplasia of the
Portuguese water dog. Vet Dermatol 6:67, 1995.
139. Paradis M: Melatonin in veterinary dermatology. Proc
Annu Meet Can Vet Med Assoc Acad Can Med Vet
50:46, 1998.
140. Paradis M: Quel est votre diagnostic? Med Vet Quebec 26:103, 1996.
141. Post K, et al: Clinical and histopathologic changes as
seen in Siberian husky follicular dysplasia, In von
Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere-Tindall, Philadelphia, 1990, p 446.
142. Post K, et al: Hair follicle dysplasia in a Siberian
husky. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:659, 1988.
143. Rest JR, et al: Dark hair follicle dystrophy in a border
collie. Vet Rec 136:607, 1994.

1002 • Congenital and Hereditary Defects
144. Robinson R: The Canadian hairless or sphinx cat.
J Hered 64:47, 1973.
145. Roperto F, et al: Colour dilution alopecia (CDA) in
ten Yorkshire terriers. Vet Dermatol 6:171, 1995.
146. Rothstein E, et al: A retrospective study of dysplastic
hair follicles and abnormal melanization in dogs with
follicular dysplasia syndromes or endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9:235, 1998.
147. Schmutz SM, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia, an
autosomal recessive condition in dogs. Can Vet J 39:
644, 1998.
147a. Schoning PR, Cowan LA: Bald thigh syndrome of
Greyhound dogs: gross and microscopic findings. Vet
Dermatol 11:49, 2000.
148. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:313, 1980.
149. Scott DW, Rothstein E: Trichoptilosis in three golden
retrievers. Canine Pract 23:14, 1998.
150. Scott DW: Les agregats de melanine dans l'appareil
pilo-sebace: Signification en dermatohistopathologie
du chat. Med vet Quebec 28:38, 1998.
151. Selmanowitz VJ, et al: Congenital ectodermal defect
in poodles. J Hered 61:196, 1970.
152. Selmanowitz VJ, et al: Black hair follicular dysplasia
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 171:1079, 1977.
153. Thoday K: Skin diseases of the cat. In Pract 3:21,
1981.
154. Thomsett LR: Congenital hypotrichia in the dog. Vet
Rec 73:915, 1961.
155. Tieghi C, et al: Medullary trichomalacia: a retrospective study of 6 cases in the German shepherd. (In
preparation, 1999).
1.56. Waldman L: Seasonal flank alopecia in afTenpinschers.
J Small Anim Pract 36:272, 1995.
157. Wilkinson GT, Kristensen TS: A hair abnormality in
Abyssinian cats. J Small Anim Pract 30:27, 1989.

Disorders of Pigmentation
158. Anderson RK: Canine acanthosis nigricans. Comp
Cont Educ 1:466, 1979.
158a. Chieffo C, et al: Cerebellar Purkinje's cell degeneration and coat color dilution in a family of Rhodesian
Ridgeback dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:112, 1994.
1.59. Colgan SP, et al: Defective in vitro motility of polymorphonuclear leukocytes of homozygote and heterozygote Chediak-Higasht cats. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 31:205, 1992.
160. Halliwell REW, Gorman NT: Veterinary Clinical Immunology. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989.
161. Prieur DJ, Collier LL: Morphologic basis of inherited coat-color dilutions of cats. J Hered 72:178,
1981.
162. Rendon MI, et al: Acanthosis nigricans: A cutaneous
marker for tissue resistance to insulin. J Am Acad
Dermatol 21:461, 1989.
163. Rickards RA: A new treatment for canine melanosis.
Mod Vet Pract 47:38, 1966.
164. Schwartzman RM, Orkin M: A Comparative Study of
Skin Diseases of Dog and Man. Charles C Thomas,
Springfield, IL, 1962, pp 313-318.
165. Scott DW, Walton DK: Clinical evaluation of oral
vitamin E for the treatment of primary acanthosis
nigricans. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:345, 1985.
166. White SD, et al: Acquired aurotrichia ("gilding syndrome") of miniature schnauzers. Vet Dermatol 3:.37,
1991.
167. Yang T: Gray collie syndrome. J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:390, 1987.

Disorders ofCollagen
168. Affolter V: Collagen disorder of the footpads of three
Cerman shepherd dogs. In Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 2. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p 418.
169. Barnett KC, Cottrell BD: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in
a dog: Ocular, cutaneous and articular abnormalities.
J Small Anim Pract 28:941, 1987.
170. Collier LA, et al: A clinical description of dermatosparaxis in a Himalayan cat. Feline Pract 10:25, 1980.
171. Colombo S, et al: Congenital collagenopathy in a kitten. Proc Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coil
Vet Dermatol 14:190, 1997.
172. Counts DF, et al: Dermatosparaxis in a Himalayan
cat. I. Biochemical studies of dermal collagen. J Invest Dermatol 74:96, 1980.
173. Ducatelle R, et al: A morphometric classification of
dermatosparaxis in the dog and cat. Vlaams Diergeneesk Tudschr 56:107, 1987.
174. Fernandez CJ, et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
collagen in cats with cutaneous asthenia or acquired
skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9:49, 1998.
175. Fontaine J, et al: Anomalie du collagene dermique:
Dermatosparaxie chez un chat europeen, Point Vet
24:255, 1992.
176. Fontaine J, Olivry T: Les asthenies cutanecs hereditaires. Point Vet 28:549, 1996.
177. Freeman LJ, et al: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in dogs
and cats. Semin Vet Med Surg 2:221, 1987.
178. Gruys E: Inflammatory syndrome of footpads in puppies and AA-amyloidosis. Vet Rec 138:264, 1996.
179. Hegreberg GA, Padgett GA: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
in animals. Bull Pathol 8:247, 1967.
180. Hegreberg GA, et al: A heritable connective tissue
disease of dogs and mink resembling the EhlersDanlos syndrome of man. II: Mode of inheritance.
J Hered 60:249, 1969.
181. Hegreberg GA, et al: A heritable connective tissue
disease of dogs and mink resembling the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome of man. III: Histopathologic changes of
the skin. Arch Pathol 90:159, 1970.
182. Holbrook KA, et al: Dermatosparaxis in the Himalayan cat. II: Ultrastructural studies of dermal collagen.
J Invest Dermatol 74:100, 1980.
182a. Jelinek F, Karban J: Cutaneous asthenia in one dog.
Acta Vet Brno 67:109, 1998.
183. Kristensen F: Deep metatarsal/metacarpal toritis in
German shepherds. Proc Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet
Dermatol Eur Coil Vet Dermatol 14:194, 1997.
184. Kunkle GA, et al: Focal metatarsal fistulas in five
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:756, 1993.
185. Matthews BR, Lewis GT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in
a dog. Can Vet J 31:389, 1990.
186. Minor RR: Animal models of heritable diseases of the
skin. In Goldsmith EL (ed): Biochemistry and Physiology of Skin. Oxford University Press, New York, 1982.
187. Minor RR, et al: Genetic diseases of connective tissues in animals. Curr Probl Dermatol 17:199, 1987.
188. Neibauerer GW, et al: Antibodies to canine collagen
types I and II with spontaneous cruciate ligament
rupture and osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 30:319,
1987.
189. Olivry T: Congenital and acquired collagen degeneration in dogs and cats. Proc Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet
Dermatol Eur Coil Vet DermatoI14:139, 1997.
190. Page N, Paradis M: Quel est votre diagnostic? Med
vet Quebec 26:147, 1996.

Congenital and Hereditary Defects • I 003
191. Paterson S: Sterile idiopathic pedal panniculitis in the
German shepherd dog-clinical presentation and response to treatment of four cases. J Small Anim Pract
36:498, 1995.
192. Patterson DF, Minor RR: Hereditary fragility and hyper-extensibility of the skin of cats. Lab Invest 37:
170, 1977.
193. Rest JR: Pathology of two possible genodermatoses.
J Small Anim Pract 30:230, 1989.
194. Rodriguez F, et al: Collagen dysplasia in a litter of
Garafiano shepherd dogs. J Vet Med A 43:509, 1996.
195. Scott DW: Cutaneous asthenia in a cat. Vet Med
(SAC) 69:1256, 1974.
196. Scott DW: Feline dermatology: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537, 1984.
196a. Sequeira JL, et al: Collagen dysplasia (cutaneous asthenia) in a cat. Vet Pathol 36:603, 1999.
197. Sousa C: Soft-coated Wheaten terriers and E.D.S.
Derm Dialogue 1:3, 1982.

Disorders ofVessels
197a. Burkett G: Skin disease in greyhounds. Vet Med 95:
U5,2000.
198. Carpenter JL, et al: Idiopathic cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol
35:401, 1988.
199. Cowan LA, et al: Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in greyhounds with cutaneous and renal
glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases (1992-1994). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 210:789, 1997.
200. Fondati A, et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy and
demodicosis in a German shepherd dog. J Small
Anim Pract 39:137, 1998.
201. Fossum TW, Miller MW: Lymphedema-etiopathogenesis. J Vet Intern Med 6:238, 1992.
202. Fossum TW, et al: Lymphedema-clinical signs, diagnosis and treatment. J Vet Intern Med 6:312, 1992.
203. Jacobsen JOG, Egges C: Primary lymphoedema in a
kitten. J Small Anim Pract 38:18, 1997.
204. Ladds PW, et al: Lethal congenital edema in bulldog
pups. J Am Vet Med Assoc 155:81, 1971.
205. Luginbuhl H, et al: Congenital hereditary lymphedema in the dog, part II: Pathological studies. J Med
Genet 4:153, 1967.
206. Neu H, et al: Primare kongenitale lymphodeme bei
sieben Labarador-, einem Deutschen Schaferhundund einem Kanadischen Wolfswelpen. Kleintierpraxis
39:S383, 1994.
207. Parker WM, Foster RA: Cutaneous vasculitis in five
Jack Russell terriers. Vet Dermatol 7:109, 1996.
208. Patterson DF, et al: Congenital hereditary lymphedema in the dog, part I: Clinical and genetic studies.
J Med Genet 4:145, 1967.
209. Pedersen K, Scott DW: Idiopathic pyogranulomatous
inflammation and leukocytoelastic vasculitis of the nasal planum, nostrils, and nasal mucosa in Scottish
terriers in Denmark. Vet Dermatol 2:85, 1991.
210. Rest JR, et al: Familial vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs. Vet Rec 138:144, 1996.
211. Ryan T, Mortimer PS: Cutaneous lymphatic system.
Clin DermatoI13:417, 1995.
212. Scott-Moncrieff JCR, et al: Systemic necrotizing vasculitis in nine young beagles. J Am Vet Med Assoc
201:1553, 1992.
213. Takahashi JL, et al: Primary lymphedema in a dog: A
case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:849, 1984.
214. Weir JAM, et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of

German shepherd dogs: Clinical, genetic, and preliminary pathological and immunologic studies. Can Vet J
35:763, 1994.

Endocrine, Metabolic, and Immunologic Disorders
215. Bettenay SV: Acrodermatitis of bull terriers-long
term management. Proc WId Cong Vet Dermatol 2:
69, 1992.
216. Jezyk PF, et al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:833, 1986.
217. Kunkle GA, et al: Tyrosinemia in a dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 20:615, 1984.
218. McEwan NA: Confirmation and investigation of lethal
acrodermatitis of bull terriers in Britain. In Ihrke PJ,
et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol
2. Pergamon Press, New York, 1993, p 151.
219. McEwan NA: Isolation of yeasts from bull terriers
suffering from lethal acrodermatitis. Proc Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol 10:277, 1993.
219a. McEwan NA: Nail disease, zinc deficiency and lethal
acrodermatitis, Proc Br Vet Dermatol Study Grp,
Spring: 29, 1999.
220. Mundell AC: Mineral analysis in bull terriers with
lethal acrodermatitis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 4:22,
1988.
221. Smits B, et al: Lethal acrodermatitis in bull terriers:
A problem of defective zinc metabolism. Vet Dermatol 2:91, 1991.

Miscellaneous Disorders
222. Uchida Y, et al: Serum concentrations of zinc and
copper in bull terriers with lethal acrodermatitis and
tail-chasing behavior. Am J Vet Res 58:808, 1997.
223. Beale KM, et al: Papular and plaque-like mucinosis in
a puppy. Vet Dermatol 2:29, 1991.
224. Cummings JF, et al: Acral mutilation and nociceptive
loss in English Pointer dogs. Acta Neuropathol 53:
U9, 1981.
225. Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz WS: Skin disorders of the
Shar pei. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy Xl. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1991, p 519.
226. Hutt FB: Necrosis of the toes. In Genetics for Dog
Breeders. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1979.
227. Mason LT: The occurrence and pedigree analysis of a
hereditary sensory neuropathy in the English springer
spaniel. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Coll Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet Dermatol 15:23, 1999.
228. Miller WH Jr, Buerger RG: Cutaneous mucinous vesiculation in a dog with hypothyroidism. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 196:757, 1990.
229. Miller WH Jr, et al: Dermatologic disorders of Chinese Shar-Peis: 58 cases (1981-1989). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 200:986, 1992.
230. Noli C, Scarampella F: Feline urticaria pigmentosalike disease in two unrelated Devon Rex cats. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll
Vet Dermatol 15:65, 1999.
231. Rusbridge C: Persistent scratching in Cavalier King
Charles spaniels. Vet Rec 140:239, 1997.
232. Rusbridge C: Persistent scratching in Cavalier King
Charles spaniels. Vet Rec 141:179, 1997.
232a. Rusbridge C, et al: Syringohydromyelia in Cavalier
King Charles spaniels. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:34,
2000.
233. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticaria pigmentosa in three
related Sphinx cats. Vet Dermatol 7:227, 1996.

Chapter

13
Pigmentary Abnormalities

• TERMINOLOGY AND INTRODUCTION
The color of normal skin depends primarily on the amount of melanin, carotene, and
oxyhemoglobin or reduced hemoglobin that it contains and the location of the pigments
within the subcutis, vessels, dermis, epidermis, and hair." Epidermal and hair pigmentation results primarily from melanin, which has two forms and imparts four basic colors.
Black and brown pigments are derived from eumelanins. The phaeomelanins are
yellow and red pigments and contain cysteine thiol groups that react to form 5-S-cysteinyl
dopa. Intermediate melanins are a blend of eumelanin and phaeomelanin. A lack of
melanin results in white hair or skin. Table 13-1 contains terminology used in describing
pigment changes. See Chapter 1 for a complete discussion of the process of melanization
and its control. Some aspects of the local regulation of melanization are mentioned
below.
In lower animals, melatonin is believed to play a major regulatory role in cutaneous
pigmentation. In humans, cats, and dogs, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and pituitary lipotrophins regulate melanization to some degree. The interaction between keratinocytes and melanocytes is also important. In humans, keratinocytes are known to produce
multiple factors that influence the growth, differentiation, tyrosinase activity, dendritic
growth, pigmentation, and morphology of melanocytes," 36 Basic fibroblast growth factor
and endothelin-l are produced by cultured human keratinocytes." Both of these factors
are melanocyte mitogens, and endothelin-l also increases tyrosinase activity in vitro.
Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-l (IL-l) stimulate intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM-l) expression on human melanocytes. A variety of cytokines and
leukotrienes influence melanocyte function, with leukotriene B4 (LTB4) locally stimulating and IL-l, IL-6, and IL-7 inhibiting melanogenesis in humans. These local factors
would better explain the patterns and localized control of the pigment changes seen in
animals.
Hair pigmentation is separate from that of the skin, and a follicular melanin unit has
also been described. In the hair, melanocytes are found in the hair bulb. In contrast to
epidermal melanocytes, which are always active, hair melanocytes are active only during
anagen. The controlling mechanism for hair pigmentation is still unknown.F' Follicular
melanocytes produce larger melanin granules. Variations in hair coloration reflect the
melanosome size, type, shape, and dispersion. The color of these hair melanosomes may
be modulated in vivo by hydrogen peroxide.
Visible pigmentation depends on which stage of melanosomes is transferred, the size
of the melanosomes, and how the melanosomes are dispersed within the keratinocyte.
Melanosomes larger than 0.5 to 0.7 /Lm are dispersed individually within keratinocytes,
and smaller melanosomes are grouped into melanosome complexes. As keratinocytes migrate to the surface of the skin, melanosomes may be degraded at different rates. Lighter
skin has higher levels of melanosome degradation than darker skin. If one considers all of
the factors involved in normal pigmentation, it becomes apparent that defects may occur
at many different levels of this complex process.
1005

I00' • Pigmentary Abnormalities
• Table 13-1

TERMINOLOGY USED TO DESCRIBE PIGMENT
CHANGES

TERM

DEFINITION

Hypopigmentation
Leukoderma
Leukotrichia
Graying
Hyperpigmentation
Melanoderma
Melanotrichia
Poliosis

General term meaning less pigment
Lack of pigment in the skin
Lack of pigment in the hair
Decreased pigment of the hair
General term meaning increase in pigment
Increased skin pigment
Increased pigment of the hair
Premature grayness of hair

• HYPERPIGMENTATION
Hyperpigmentation or melanoderma is associated primarily with increased melanin in the
epidermis and comeocytes. Histologically, there may also be dermal pigment, but when
the majority of the pigment is in the dermis, a slate or steel blue coloration is present.
Hyperpigmentation in animals may be genetic, acquired, or associated with pigmented
tumors.

Genetic
LENTIGO
Lentigo is a macular melanosis that is intensely black and usually occurs as multiple
lesions that are most common on the ventrum. Lentigines appear in mature dogs. They
often increase in number and size over a period of several months; subsequently, they
become static and remain unchanged for the life of the dog. The lesions are sometimes
grouped in clusters or may spread rather diffusely over the ventral surface of the body.
These sharply circumscribed macules do not itch and are of no consequence to the
patient. They should not have a rough surface nor be palpably thickened. When a
hyperkeratotic surface or thickening is present, other diseases such as epidermal nevi or
papillomavirus-induced lesions must be considered. Lentigines have been referred to as
"tar spots" (Fig. 13-1).
A hereditary form of lentigo called lentiginosis profusa has been reported in Pugs and
was thought to have an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance." Many of the lesions
described in these dogs were clinically and histologically hyperplastic." however, so it is
likely that the authors were actually describing pigmented epidermal nevi'? or papillomainduced Iesions.P Similarly, generalized lentigines-probably epidermal nevi-were reported in a cat. 2 1
Histologically, early lentigines are characterized by a sharply localized increase in the
number of melanocytes and melanosomes." 28 The epidermal pigmentation is greatly
increased, because almost every keratinocyte contains melanosomes. Usually, no structural
changes or only mild structural changes occur in the epidermis. As the lesion develops,
the epidermis may thicken slightly, mild orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis may occur, and
slight rete ridge formation may be present.
This is a cosmetic lesion with no known significance in dogs and cats, because none
have been reported to become malignant. The only significance is that this lesion may
need to be differentiated from pigmented tumors, especially melanomas, papillomavirusinduced lesions (which may have a premalignant potential), and pigmented nevi.

LENTIGO SIMPLEX IN ORANGE CATS
Lentigo Simplex has been described in orange cats. 26, 28 The condition is characterized by
asymptomatic macular melanosis, usually beginning in cats younger than 1 year of age.

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 007

FIGURE 13-1. Close-up view of a 7-year-old French bulldog with multiple lentigines. Note
the intensity of the pigmentation and the sharply demarcated borders.

The lesions start on the lips and begin as tiny, black, asymptomatic spots that
gradually enlarge and become more numerous with time. There can be lesions On the
nose, gingiva, and eyelids in addition to the lip. Well-circumscribed, generally circular
areas of intense, uniform macular melanosis, ranging from 1 to 9 mm in diameter and
occasionally coalescent, are present in variable numbers (Fig. 13-2 A). The surrounding
tissue is normal. The lesions do not vary in the intensity of hyperpigmentation with the
time of year. They are asymptomatic, do not develop into melanoma, and have no
identified cause.
Histopathologic findings include marked hypermelanosis, predominantly of the basal
cell layer of the epithelium, that is caused by the increased numbers of melanocytes and
by hypermelanosis of the neighboring basal keratinocytes (Fig. 13-3). Occasionally, melanophages are seen in the superficial dermis.
Lentigo simplex is a cosmetic defect. These lesions do not require treatment, but if it
is desired, surgical excision is the only way to eliminate them.
EPIDERMAL NEVUS
Nevi are developmental defects in the skin and, in some cases, have been hereditary in
nature (see Chap. 20). They may have a relationship to dermatomes or peripheral nerves
and can appear in a linear fashion." Most epidermal and all melanocytic nevi are associated with increased pigmentation, but with epidermal nevi, the degree of pigmentation is
variable. Comedo nevi are often pigmented but appear as peppered macules or plaques.
These lesions are often cosmetic, although secondary infections may occur and some
may be pruritic or inflammatory. Surgical excision or laser surgery ablation is curative.
Etretinate has been helpful in some nonsurgical lesions of epidermal or comedo nevi.
CANINE ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
This disease is seen most commonly in Dachshunds, and this has led to the belief that the
primary (idiopathic) form is genetic in origin (see Chap. 12). Similar lesions may be
acquired and occur secondary to a variety of chronic inflammatory diseases. Thus, the

FIGURE 13-2. Legend on opposite page

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 009

FIGURE 13-3. Feline lentigo simplex. Note the abrupt transition between the melanotic area
(left) and normal epithelium (right).

term has also been described as a reaction pattern associated with things such as friction
(Fig. 13-4), hypersensitivity diseases, and seborrhea with Malassezia.

URTICARIA PIGMENTOSA
This disease has been reported in Sphinx cats and may have a genetic basis, as some cats
were related.P Multifocal to generalized flat-topped papules and plaques can be seen (Fig.
13-5). These may have a dark brown color. The lesions are usually pruritic and may
exhibit a distribution associated with previous trauma. Diagnosis is confirmed by histopathology revealing mast cell infiltration with no malignant features. Treatment with antihistamines and systemic glucocorticoids has been reported to be beneficial (see Chaps. 12
and 20).

Acquired
POSTINFLAMMATORY
The most common form of hyperpigmentation is postinflammatory. Many dogs and some
cats produce more pigment in or around areas of inflammation. Many diseases characterized by chronic erythematous papular lesions may undergo hyperpigmentation. Often, this
type of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation has a lattice-like appearance and is most
commonly seen with superficial bacterial pyodermasY Many other chronic inflammatory

FIGURE 13-2. Pigment abnormalities. A, Lentigo simplex in an orange cat with marked macular melanosis of the lips.
B, Melanotrichia patches in a poodle with sebaceous adenitis. C, Vitiligo in a Rottweiler. Note the nasal and eyelid
depigmentation and patch leukotrichia on the head. D, Vitiligo of the claws concurrent with onychodystrophy. E, Patchy
hypopigmentation present from birth on the lips of a mature Doberman pinscher. F, A 2-year-old Newfoundland that had a
normal black color at birth but gradually developed patchy hypopigmentation evident in skin and hairs. G. Epitheliotropic
lymphoma affecting the nasal planum. H, Acquired aurotrichia in a miniature schnauzer. (Courtesy S. White.)

I 0 I 0 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

FIGURE 13-4. Hyperpigmented
lichenified plaque in the axilla of a
dachshund that developed after the
dog gained several pounds.

diseases also result in hyperplgmentation, examples include the chronic or healing lesions
of canine demodicosis, canine scabies, and the center of healing annular dermatophytosis.
Occasionally, a patch of pigmented comedones appears as a hyperpigmented patch or
plaque. These patches or plaques may be from slate blue to gray in color and should raise
the suspicion of demodicosis, hyperadrenocorticism, or comedo nevus (Fig. 13-6).
More diffuse hyperpigmentation may result from the chronic diffuse inflammation
that may be associated with such things as exposure to ultraviolet light of skin that has lost
hair or from chronic irritation due to cutaneous friction. Most pruritic diseases may be
incriminated because both friction and inflammation may lead to hyperpigmentation. It is
common to see hyperpigmentation in dogs with hypersensitivity diseases.
Melanotrichia may also occur in animals after the healing of areas of deep inflammation (e.g., panniculitis, vaccine reaction). This is seen more commonly in certain breeds
such as the Yorkshire terrier, Silky terrier, Bedlington terrier, Old English sheepdog, and
Poodle. In some dogs, especially Poodles with sebaceous adenitis, multifocal areas of
melanotrichia may be seen (see Fig. 13-2B). Because the inflammatory lesions of sebaceous adenitis occur even in areas without melanotrichia, it is possible that this alteration

FIGURE 13-5. Urticaria pigmentosa in a Sphinx cat. (Courtesy C.
Vitali). Several papules, many of
which are coalesced to form a linear
plaque on the lateral thoracoabdominal area.

Pigmentary Abnormalities • 101 I

FIGURE 13-6. Hyperpigmentation in the prepucial area due to
comedones in a case of de modicosis.

is not due to inflammation but occurs as a result of some other pathomechanism. Multifocal areas of melanotrichia have been seen in Poodles following bouts of intervertebral disk
disease.
The exact mechanism of hyperpigmentation in these inflammatory diseases is unknown. Studies suggest that keratinocytes may be able to locally stimulate melanogenesis
by releasing melanocyte stimulating factors. It is possible that these factors are present at
low levels in the normal epidermis, but their levels and activity are increased in response
to stimulation or keratinocyte stress." The focal postinflammatory melanotrichia seen in
adult dogs with silver or gray haircoats may be the result of reversion to a puppy coat
under the influence of genes at the graying (G) locus. Silver dogs are usually born with
dark coats that lighten when the adult hairs develop. If the melanotrichia is due to G
locus influences, the hairs revert to their normal adult color at the next shedding. In other
dogs, the melanotrichia may be due to the influence of melanocyte-stimulating factors
such as LTB4.

HORMONE-ASSOCIATED
Diffuse hyperpigmentation may also result from some metabolic or hormonal disorders
such as hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, and the sex hormone dermatoses (see
Chap. 10). The mechanism is unknown, although it has been suggested that the hyperpigmentation may result from direct effects of the hormonal changes on the melanocytes.
ACTH and other pituitary lipotrophic hormones stimulate melanogenesis, and this factor
may be why some hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal sex hormone cases become hyperpigmented. However, the direct actions of other hormones on the melanocytes have not been
well defined. In some cases, it also appears that ultraviolet exposure may play a role.
When alopecia precedes the hyperpigmentation, skin is exposed to light, which can
contribute to the pigment changes that occur. Protection of the skin decreases the
hyperpigmentation in some animals.
Melanotrichia may also occur following the resolution of metabolic or hormonal
disorders; it is commonly noted in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism that are treated with
mitotane (o,p'-DDD) (Fig. 13-7). The mechanism is unknown, but G locus influences are
probably important in dogs with silver coats.

DRUG-INDUCED
Hyperpigmentation due to drug administration is rare. 0, p'-DD D therapy (or the control
of the disease being treated) may be associated with hypermelanosis and melanotrichia.
Because this change is usually temporary, even when o,p'-DDD therapy is continued, it is

I0 I2 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

FIGURE 13-7. Apricot Poodle that developed
melanotrichia following treatment of its Cushing's
disease with mitotane (o.p' -DOD.) A, Before treatment. B, After treatment. Usually the normal coat
color returns, even with continued o.p' -DOD
maintenance therapy.

possibly caused by hormonal changes and not by the drug. Experimentally, the drug
minocycline has been shown to cause hyperpigmentation in dogs,1. and the effect was
believed to be attributable to iron deposition. In humans, a variety of other metallic
substances may cause cutaneous pigment changes; for example, changes may be acquired
by parenteral or topical absorption of metals such as silver, gold, and mercury.'

PAPILLOMAVIRUS-ASSOCIATED
Canine papillomaviruses induce at least two syndromes that may have pigmented lesions.
Cutaneous exophytic papillomas usually occur in older dogs and more commonly in male
dogs.28 They appear as cauliflower-like nodules or keratinous plaques, mainly on the head,
eyelids, and paws. The lesions may appear flesh tone, pink, brown, or black in color.
These lesions may regress on their own. Papillomavirus-associated canine pigmented
plaques have been compared with epidermodysplasia verruciformis.F? This disease is seen
mainly in young Pugs, miniature Schnauzers, and Shar peis and may have a genetic basis.
The lesions are often slightly rough black pigmented macules to plaques. They occur
mostly on the groin, abdomen, ventral thorax, and neck. They do not spontaneously
regress and often are slowly progressive. They have been reported to transform into
squamous cell carcinoma (see Chap. 20) (Fig. 13-8).

FELINE ACROMELANISM
Siamese, Himalayan, Balinese, and Burmese kittens are born white and develop points as
adults owing to the influence of external temperature-", high environmental temperatures

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I0 I 3

FIGURE 13-8. Pigmented viral
papillomas that developed into a
squamous cell carcinoma in the axillary area of a dog.

produce light hairs, and low temperatures produce dark hairs. Coat color also appears to
be affected by physiologic factors that determine heat production and loss (e.g., inflammation, alopecia) (Fig. 15-9). These color change phenomena appear to be associated with a
temperature-dependent enzyme involved in melanin synthesis. The changes in coat color
are usually temporary, and the normal color returns with the next hair cycle, if the
temperature influences are remedied.
PIGMENTED TUMORS
Many tumors have pigmentation different from the surrounding skin. This color difference
may reflect the type of tissue and its associated color or other pigments. Vascular tumors
may appear red, port wine, or red-blue. Histiocytic, lymphocytic, and plasmacytic tumors
often appear pink, red, or purple. The common hyperpigmented (black) tumors are the
melanocytoma and melanoma; however, a variety of tumors may occur with hyperpigmentation. Basal cell tumors, trichoblastomas, fibromas, epidermal nevi, and epithelial nevi
may also commonly occur as hyperpigmented lesions. The lesions of squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) in the cat may also be dark brown to black (Fig. 13-9).

FIGURE 13-9. Pigmented plaque
in a cat from Bowen's disease.

10 14 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

• HYPOPIGMENTATION
Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis) refers to a lack or decrease of pigment in the skin or
haircoat in areas that should normally be pigmented. Hereditary hypomelanoses have been
divided into melanocytopenic (absence of melanocytes) and melanopenic (decreased melanin) forms.' Pigment loss may occur from melanocyte destruction, dysfunction, or abnormal dispersion of melanosomes as a result of abnormal melanosome transfer or from
inflammation. Lack of or decrease in melanosome production may also be a cause. The
disorder may be congenital or acquired.

Genetic
CHEDIAK-HIGASHI SYNDROME

Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder reported in Persian cats
with yellow eyes and a blue smoke haircoat color.' It is characterized by partial oculocutaneous albinism and is discussed in Chapter 12.
ALBINISM

Albinism is a hereditary lack of pigmentation that is transmitted as an autosomal recessive
trait. 1, 7, 11 Albino individuals have a normal complement of melanocytes, but they lack
tyrosinase for melanin synthesis and, therefore, have a biochemical inability to produce
melanin. Therefore, histopathologic studies reveal a normal epidermis with no pigment,
but clear basal cells representing melanocytes are still seen. Skin, hair, and mucous
membranes are amelanotic. Although humans have unpigmented (pink) irides, dogs typically have milder ocular changes, with blue eyes. 12 These dogs should not be used as
breeders.
PIEBALDISM

Genetically determined white spotting is referred to as piebaldism. 1 It is common in dogs
and is transmitted as a completely dominant trait. Melanocytes are absent or incompletely
differentiated in affected sites.

W AARDENBURG-KLEIN SYNDROME
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome has been described in cats, Bull terriers, Sealyham terriers,
Collies, and Dalmatians. In addition to blue eyes and amelanotic skin and hair, the
affected animals are deaf and have blue or heterochromic irides. 1, 12 The defect is in the
migration and differentiation of melanoblasts. Therefore, the affected skin has no melanocytes present. The syndrome is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance, so these animals should not be used for breeding.
CANINE CYCLIC HEMATOPOIESIS

Canine cyclic hematopoiesis (also known as gray collie syndrome and canine cyclic neutropenia) is a lethal autosomal recessive syndrome wherein collie puppies are born with a
Silver-gray haircoat that differs from the normal sable or tricolor coat (see Chap. 12). In
some of these puppies, a slight yellow pigmentation may be present, which produces a
mixture of light beige and light gray hair. The light-colored nose is a characteristic and
diagnostic lesion.

Breed-Associated, Suspect Genetic
GRAYING

Graying results from a reduction in melanocyte replication through senescence. It appears
to be age and genetically related as certain breeds are more prone. German shepherd

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 0 I 5

dogs, Irish setters, Labrador retrievers and golden retrievers appear to be more likely to
develop gray muzzles and chin at a relatively younger age (Fig. 13-10).

VITILIGO
A presumptive hereditary vitiligo has been described in Belgian Tervuren dogs, German
shepherds, collies, Siamese cats, Rottweilers, Doberman pinschers, and giant Schnauzers.
It has also been described in a Bull mastiff, Newfoundlands, Old English sheepdogs, and
a Dachshund with juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus. 1, 11, 18, 24., 27, 28, 30 Interestingly it has
been reported in only female Siamese cats.!" It appears that, as in humans, vitiligo in dogs
and cats is inherited in a multifactorial genetic pattern."
Although the exact cause of vitiligo is unknown, several theories have been proposed." The autoimmune theory is a favored one, and antimelanocyte antibodies have
been demonstrated in the serum of humans, dogs, and cats with active vitiligo.22 Antimelanocyte antibodies were demonstrated in the serum of all 17 Belgian Tervuren dogs with
vitiligo and in none of 11 normal Belgian Tervuren dogs tested.P Also, three affected
Siamese cats had autoantibodies, but four normal Siamese cats did not. One Siamese cat
had negative immunostaining for vimentin suggesting a destruction of dendritic cells."
The autotoxicity theory proposes an increased melanocyte susceptibility to melanin precursor molecules (such as dopachrome) or an inhibition of thioredoxin reductase, a freeradical scavenger located on the melanocyte membrane. The neural theory proposes nerve
injury to explain dermatomally distributed vitiligo. A viral association has been suggested. 9
It is important to consider that multiple mechanisms could be responsible for the same
phenotype.
The animals develop somewhat symmetric macular leukoderma and leukotrichia, especially of the nose, lips, buccal mucosa, and facial skin (see Fig. 13-2C and D). The
footpads (Fig. 13-11) and claws, as well as the haircoat, may be affected. The authors
have seen Rottweilers develop onychomadesis and leukonychia concurrently with vitiligo
(Fig. 13-12). The onset of the condition is usually in young adulthood. In some cases,
pigment returns to affected areas; in others, however, the depigmentation is permanent.
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and histopathologic evaluation.
Late lesions of vitiligo are characterized by a relatively normal epidermis and dermis,
except that no melanocytes are seen (Fig. 13-13). In some cases (possibly early lesions), a
mild lymphocytic interface dermatitis and occasional lymphocyte exocytosis may be seen.'?
Electron microscopy studies of melanocytes at the periphery of lesions demonstrate degenerative changes (cytoplasmic vacuolization, aggregation of melanosomes, autophagic
vacuoles, fatty degeneration, and pyknosis)."

FIGURE 13-10. Gray muzzle in
a Gennan Shepherd dog.

I 0 I 6 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

FIGURE 13-11. Vitiligo in a Siamese cat. Depigmented
(Courtesy E. Cuaguere.)

footpads.

Successful treatment has not been reported, although a small number of cases may
spontaneously improve. Spontaneous improvement over 3 years was reported in a Siamese
cat. 16

NASAL HYPOPIGMENTATION
Nasal depigmentation is a term for a syndrome more appropriately called nasal hypopigmentation. When pigment loss is complete, then it is appropriately called nasal depigmen-

FIGURE 13-12. Onychomadesis and leukonychia in a Rottweiler with vitiligo.

Pigmentary Abnormalities • 10 17

FIGURE 13-13. Canine vitiligo. A, Normal skin adjacent to a vitiliginous macule. B, Complete absence of melanin in
a vitiliginous area.

tation, which also is called Dudley nose. This syndrome is of unknown origin and may be
a form of vitiligo. to It has been reported in Afghan hounds, Samoyeds, Siberian huskies,
yellow Labrador retrievers, white German shepherds, Golden retrievers, Poodles, Doberman pinschers, Irish setters, and Pointers. to. 18, 28 The dogs are normal at birth, but the
black of the nasal planum gradually fades to a chocolate brown or whitish color. No
treatment has yet worked effectively. A few patients recover spontaneously; in others, the
degree of pigmentation waxes and wanes, sometimes seasonally. Because this discoloration
is a show ring fault, breeders of show animals are understandably concerned.
A distinction between noses that depigment almost entirely and those that only
lighten should be made. A common syndrome of seasonal nasal hypopigmentation is
seen in Siberian huskies, Golden retrievers, Labrador retrievers, and Bernese Mountain
dogS.18 , 28 It has been referred to as snow nose and is characterized by a decrease in the
nasal pigment, typically during the winter months (Fig. 13-14). The pigment gets darker
again in the spring or summer. Complete depigmentation is not noted. The lips, pads,
eyelids, claws, and haircoat are not usually affected.

MUCOCUTANEOUS HYPOPIGMENTATION
Leukoderma or hypopigmentation of the nasal planum, lips, or eyelids or in the tongue
and oral cavity is considered a fault in most breeds of dogs. The nasal form is a
particularly common problem in Australian shepherds, Siberian huskies, and Golden and

I0 I 8 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

FIGURE 13-14. Canine snow nose.

Labrador retrievers. Some of these dogs also have seasonal nasal hypopigmentation. Although they have lightly pigmented noses, there is still enough pigment to prevent
sunburn. Dogs with complete leukoderma of the nasal planum are prone to sunburn,
which may develop into nasal solar dermatitis.
Hypopigmentation of the lips and nose occurs as a congenital condition in Doberman
pinschers, Rottweilers, and occasionally, other breeds? (see Fig. 13-2E). It is present from
birth and is static in contrast to vitiligo, which is acquired in mature dogs and often
progresses or changes over time. The cause of congenital hypopigmentation is unknown.
Many owners object to the cosmetic appearance, but no treatment is effective.

TYROSINASE DEFICIENCY
Tyrosinase deficiency has been reported in Chow Chows, but the condition is extremely
rare. Puppies with this condition exhibit a dramatic color change. The normally bluish
black tongue turns pink, and portions of the hair shafts tum white. The buccal mucosa
may also rapidly depigment.
The change in color is the result of a deficiency of tyrosinase, the enzyme necessary

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 0 I 9

to produce melanin. Tyrosinase deficiency can be confirmed by skin biopsy. After tyrosine
is added to histologic preparations, the specimen is incubated, and the melanin is measured after tissue staining." There is no effective treatment; however, melanin reappears
spontaneously in 2 to 4 months. Chow Chow breeders have claimed success with the use
of vitamins, unsaturated oils, and dietary changes, but the improvement was probably
spontaneous.

Acquired
Acquired hypopigmentation of previously normal skin and hair can result from many
factors that destroy melanocytes or inhibit melanocyte function.v 24 Trauma, bums, infections, and ionizing irradiation may have potent local effects. It may also be idiopathic.
Dogs that sunbathe frequently or swim in chlorine pools and dry themselves in the sun
may develop lighter and coarser haircoats.
POSTINFLAMMATORY
Inflammation may cause hypopigmentation. This postinflammatory hypopigmentation is
less common than hyperpigmentation. Postinflammatory hypopigmentation is most evident
in the groin and inguinal region following folliculitis. Multiple circular hypopigmented
macules may be seen, or they can coalesce into variably shaped macules. Other infections,
such as blastomycosis, sporotrichosis, and leishmaniasis, may cause hypopigmentation. ll • 18
One infectious disease in particular to consider with leukoderma without obvious swelling
or infectious lesions is leishmaniasis (Fig. 13-15). Acquired hypopigmentation of the nose
and lips can result from contact dermatitis from plastic or rubber food dishes. A red Irish
setter puppy that had severe pustular dermatitis developed white bands around the hair
shafts, presumably a result of the effects on pigment production in the hair bulb during
the infection."
A number of inflammatory diseases may begin with nasal hypopigmentation or depigmentation of the nose and occasionally lips. Discoid lupus erythematosus most commonly
starts on the nasal planum, but occasionally, systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus

FIGURE 13-15. Nasal depigmentation associated with leishmaniasis (Courtesy A. Koutinas).

I 020 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

erythematosus and foliaceus, uveodermatologic syndrome, drug eruption, and bullous
pemphigoid may also start on the nose.

DRUG-RELATED
Hypomelanosis due to drugs has been seen with subcutaneous injections of glucocorticoids
and progestational drugs and with topical glucocorticoids. Some dogs that receive ketoconazole for mycotic infections or procainamide for cardiac disease develop diffuse lightening
of their coats (Fig. 13-16). Chemical hypomelanosis may occur following the administration of potent antioxidants such as dihydroquinone and monobenzyl ether. 11, 18 One tricolor collie with lupus erythematosus developed leukotrichia following vitamin E therapy.
A cause for the leukotrichia was not determined, although it was speculated that there
was an association with vitamin E because the mucocutaneous depigmentation attributed
to lupus was reversed with therapy before the leukotrichia developed.

METABOLIC
Some chronic metabolic diseases may affect haircoat color. This cause appears to be
particularly prominent in the sex hormone dermatoses of male dogs. Deficiencies of
nutrients such as zinc, pyridoxine, pantothenic acid, and lysine have produced graying of
the hair. Copper deficiency is said to cause black hair to develop a reddish brown hue.

FIGURE 13-16. A, Doberman pinscher before therapy. B, Same dog during procainamide therapy. C, Abrupt
alteration in hair pigmentation from a dog taking procainamide. The drug caused lightening of the coat color.

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 021

NEOPLASIA
Hypomelanosis associated with neoplastic conditions has been seen in dogs. Leukoderma
or leukotrichia, especially of the nasal planum, lips, and face, may occur as an early sign of
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides and pagetoid reticulosis) (Fig. 13-2G).!8
Nasal depigmentation has also been seen with squamous cell carcinoma.'! A peritumoral
amelanotic halo has been seen around basal cell tumors.'! Leukoderma or leukotrichia
may be seen with mammary adenocarcinoma or gastric carcinoma. 11

IDIOPATHIC
Normal black Newfoundlands, at about 18 months of age, may develop patches of depigmentation on the nose, lips, and eyelids (see Fig. 13-2F). The lesions steadily progress,
affecting the hair follicles in a diffuse manner. The animals become "gray roans." Supplementation with trace minerals, vitamins, and zinc produces no improvement.
A litter of chocolate Labrador retriever puppies developed idiopathic leukotrichia that
was reversible.'? In this litter, 7 of 10 puppies were affected with varying degrees of
leukotrichia, which was initially noted at 8 weeks of age on the face but then spread. By
the time the puppies were 14 weeks of age, one owner reported that pigmentation was
returning. Eventually, all of the affected puppies developed normal coat colors, and no
recurrences were noted over the following 18 months.
Idiopathic, widespread but patchy leukotrichia is occasionally seen in adult black or
chocolate Labrador retrievers (Fig. 13-17). The condition appears to be permanent.

PERIOCULAR LEUKOTRICHIA
Bilateral periocular leukotrichia (goggles) occurs in Siamese cats." There is no apparent
age predilection, but the condition is seen more commonly in females. Commonly recognized precipitating factors include pregnancy, dietary deficiency, and systemic illnesses.
The condition is characterized by patchy or complete lightening of the hairs of the mask
in a halo-like appearance around both eyes (Fig. 13-18). The condition is transient and
usually resolves within the succeeding two hair cycles.
A syndrome of unilateral periocular depigmentation, called Aguirre's syndrome, has
been described in Siamese cats. This condition is associated with Homer's syndrome, or
corneal necrosis with uveitis, and upper respiratory tract infections.P

FIGURE 13-17. Idiopathlc leukotrichia in an adult black Labrador
retriever.

I 022 • Pigmentary Abnormalities

FIGURE 13-18. Periocular leukotrichia (goggles) in a Siamese cat after estrus .

• MISCELLANEOUS PIGMENT CHANGES
Acquired Aurotrichia
This syndrome occurs in miniature Schnauzers of either sex.35 The primary guard hairs
turn from silver or black to gold (see Fig. 13-2H). These gold hairs occur primarily in
patches on the dorsal thorax and abdomen, although periocular and pinnal involvement
occurs in some cases. An associated thinning of the secondary hair in the affected areas
may be noted (see Chap. 12).

Red Hair
A variety of conditions can cause hair to become reddish in color. Lightly colored hair
exposed to saliva or tears becomes stained by porphyrins. When seen in areas other than
around the oral cavity or ventral to the eyes, this change usually indicates excessive
licking. Poor-quality protein diets have been associated with the development of red hair;
the condition resolves when a proper diet is followed." This color change was associated
with indicanuria and indicanemia. Diets deficient in copper may also cause red hair.
A variety of endocrinopathies may cause lightening of the haircoat or result in dark
hair turning red. Although it is reported with hypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism,
this change seems especially common with Sertoli cell tumors and in cases of hyperestrogenism or hyperprogesteronism. Some dogs with Sertoli cell tumors fail to shed their coat
normally, and hairs are actually retained in catagen or telogen. The hairs remain for years;
the lightened, red, dry, frizzy coat may be partly caused by chronic ultraviolet and
environmental exposure. The potential effects of sun, chlorine, detergents, and environmental factors should be considered any time the coat color has changed.

Red/Brown Claws
Claws may turn a brown or red color. This problem can result from licking and salivary
staining. Malassezia dermatitis has also been associated with this change, and less frequently, bacterial paronychia may also cause this discoloration (see Chap. 19).

Flushing
Cutaneous flushing, in which the skin turns varying shades of red, is due to vasodilatation
of cutaneous blood vessels. Flushing can be persistent or paroxysmal; it is caused by
emotional, autonomic, or endocrine influences, or by the direct action of vasoactive
compounds in the blood vessels." 28 In humans, widespread flushing can be caused by a
variety of physiologic and pathologic conditions, especially the carcinoid syndrome, sys-

Pigmentary Abnormalities • I 023
temic mastocytosis, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, or pheochromocytoma. In dogs, persistent
flushing has been attributed to drug reactions and mast cell tumors. Paroxysmal flushing
has been associated with pheochromocytoma and mast cell tumors.'?

Drug-Induced Color Changes
Some drugs may induce color changes in the skin. Rifampin, 13 carotene, and clofazamine
are known in people to cause reddish orange discoloration of the skin. A cat treated with
clofazamine developed reddish orange skin and mucus membranes, which resolved following discontinuation of therapy.'! Pinnal erythema has been reported in cats in association
with enrofloxacin or ciprofloxacin administration."

• REFERENCES
1. Alhaidari Z, et al: Melanocytogenesis and melanogenesis: Genetic regulation and comparative clinical diseases. Vet DermatoI1O:3, 1999.
la. Benitz KF, et al: Morphologic effects of minocycline in
laboratory animals. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 11:150,
1967.
2. Bergfeld WF, McMahon JT: Identification of foreign
metallic substances inducing hypopigmentation of skin.
Light microscopy, electron microscopy, and x-ray energy spectroscopic examination. In: Callen IP, et al
(eds): Advances in Dermatology-Vol 2. Year Book
Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1987, p 171.
3. Bolognia IL, Pawelek JM: Biology of hypopigmentation. I Am Acad Dermatol 19:217, 1988.
4. Briggs OM: Lentiginosis profusa in the pug: Three
case reports. I Small Anim Pract 26:675, 1985.
5. Engstrom D: Tyrosinase deficiency in the Chow Chow.
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy II. WB
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1966, p 352.
6. Fitzpatrick TB, et al: Dermatology in General Medicine, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co, New York, 1993.
7. Foil CS: Comparative genodermatoses. Clin Dermatol
3:175, 1985.
8. Griess D, Cuaguere E: Variations de l'indicanemie et
de l'indicanurie dans Ie syndrome rubra-pilaire du
chien. Rev Med vs. 132:12, 1981.
9. Grimes PE, et al: Cytomegalovirus DNA identified in
skin biopsy specimens of patients with vitiligo. I Am
Acad Dermatol 35:21-26, 1996.
10. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology: Gross
and Microscopic Pathology of Skin Diseases. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1992.
11. Cuaguere E, Alhaidari Z: Disorders of melanin pigmentation in the skin of dogs and cats. Proc WId Small
Anim Vet Assoc 8:47, 1991.
12. Cuaguere E, Alhaidari Z: Pigmentary disturbances.
Adv Vet Dermatoll:395, 1990.
13. Holzworth I: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Surgery, Vol I. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
14. Kaufman AC, et al: Treatment of localized Mycobacterium avium complex infection with clofazamine and
doxycycline in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 207:457,
1995.
15. Kovacs SO: Vitiligo. J Am Acad Dermatol 38:647,
1998.
16. Lopez R, et al: A clinical, pathological and immunopathological study of vitiligo in a siamese cat. Vet Dermatol 5:27, 1994.

17. MacDonald 1M: Hyperpigmentation. In: Griffin CE, et
al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 234.
18. MacDonald 1M: Nasal depigmentation. In: Griffin CE,
et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 223.
19. Miller WH [r: Cutaneous flushing associated with intrathoracic neoplasia in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
28:217,1992
20. Nagata M, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with
papillomavirus infection in dogs: Is this epidermodysplasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6:179, 1995.
21. Nash S, Paulsen D: Generalized lentigines in a silver
cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1500, 1990.
22. Naughton GK, et al: Antibodies to surface antigens of
pigmented cells in animals with vitiligo. Proc Soc Exp
Bioi Med 181:423, 1986.
23. Ortonne IP, Prota G: Hair melanins and hair color:
Ultrastructural and biochemical aspects. I Invest Dermatol 101:82S, 1993.
24. Pawelek I, et al: New regulators of melanin biosynthesis and the autodestruction of melanin cells. Nature
286:617, 1980.
24a. Peterson A, et al: Progressive leukotrichia and leukoderma in a Newfoundland dog. In: Kwochka KW, et al
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p. 443.
25. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: The secret
sits. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
26. Scott DW: Lentigo simplex in orange cats. Comp
Anim Pract 1:23, 1987.
27. Scott DW: Vitiligo in the Rottweiler. Canine Pract 15:
22,1990.
28. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1995.
29. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: Literature review and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26(4):10,
1998.
30. Scott DW, Randolph IF: Vitiligo in two old English
sheepdog littermates and a dachshund with juvenile onset diabetes mellitus. Comp Anim Pract 19:18,
1989.
31. VanRensburg rBI, Briggs OM: Pathology of canine lentiginosis profusa. I S Afr Vet Assoc 57:159, 1986.

I 024 • Pigmentary Abnormalities
32. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticaria pigmentosa in
three related Sphinx cats. Vet Dermatol 7:227-233,
1996.
33. White SD, Butch S: Leukotrichia in a litter of Labrador retrievers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:319, 1990.
34. White SD, et al: Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevus in four dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:107, 1993.
35. White SD, et al: Acquired aurotrichia ("Gilding syn-

drorne") of miniature schnauzers. Vet Dermatol 3:37,
1992.
36. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA: Human melanocyte growth and
differentiation: A decade of new data. J Invest Dermatol 97:611, 1991.
37. Yohn
et al: Cultured human keratinocytes synthesize and secrete endothelin-L J Invest Dermatol 100:
23, 1993.

n,

Chapter

14
Keratinization Defects

K

eratinization defects are those that alter the surface appearance of the skin. The
epidermis of animals is being replaced constantly by new cells. The epidermal cell
renewal time in normal dogs is approximately 22 days.32 Despite this high turnover rate,
the epidermis maintains its normal thickness, has a barely perceptible surface keratin
layer, and loses its dead cells invisibly into the environment. If the delicate balance
between cell death and renewal is altered, the epidermal thickness changes, the stratum
corneum becomes noticeable, and the normally invisible sloughed cells of the stratum
corneum become obvious. The causes of keratinization defects are numerous; they produce clinical signs by altering proliferation, differentiation, desquamation, or some combination of these. 3,3 . 62 Alterations in epidermal lipid formation and deposition can accompany these other changes."
The keratinization defects include hyperkeratosis, hypokeratosis, and dyskeratosis. Hyperkeratosis is common in chronic dermatoses. It is further distinguished histopathologically into parakeratotic (nucleated) and orthokeratotic (anuclear) types. 27. 59 Hypokeratosis
is not as common, but it is seen histologically in some cases, presumably as a result of
very rapid exfoliation. Another fault in epidermopoiesis is dyskeratosis, which is seen in
neoplastic skin diseases (such as squamous cell carcinoma).
Keratinization defects can be congenital or acquired. The congenital defects (e.g.,
primary seborrhea, ichthyosis, epidermal dysplasia of West Highland White terriers, psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, and Schnauzer comedo syndrome) are discussed in Chapter 12. The most common acquired keratinization defect is
the callus, which is discussed in Chapter 16. The remainder are considered here.
A characteristic of healthy skin is that the relationship between transepidermal water
loss and hydration remains directly proportional.' Following skin damage or a decrease in
efficiency of the water barrier, a dissociation between hydration (water-holding capacity)
and transepidermal water loss occurs. In pathologic skin, the correlation between transepidermal water loss and stratum corneum water content shows an inverse relationship due
to a damaged skin barrier or alterations in keratinization, or both. Hence, there is
increased transepidermal water loss and decreased hydration.
Dryness (xerosis) of the skin is caused by decreased water content, which must be
more than 10% for skin to appear and feel normal." Moisture loss occurs through
evaporation to the environment under low humidity conditions and must be replenished
by water from lower epidermal and dermal layers. In xerotic skin, the stratum corneum is
thickened, disorganized, and fissured. An important part of the stratum corneum barrier is
the presence of three intercellular lipids: sphingolipids, free sterols, and free fatty acids.
Lamellar bodies are an essential part of this barrier to both trap and prevent excess water
loss. The optimal stratum corneum water concentration to promote softness and pliability
is 20% to 35% .

• ANTISEBORRHEIC TREATMENTS
Antiseborrheic agents are available as ointments, creams, gels, lotions, and shampoos." In
veterinary medicine, seborrheic lesions are usually widespread in nature and occur in
1025

I 026 • Keratinization Defects

haired skin, thus making the shampoo vehicle the most appropriate." For the most part,
veterinary shampoo formulations are not patented and "identical" products can be marketed by one or more generic manufacturers. The reader is advised to approach these
products carefully. Although the active ingredients may be identical in name and concentration, the purity, stability, and irritability of the active and inert ingredients may be very
different and the shampoo may perform poorly." If a change from one brand of the
"same" shampoo to another is contemplated, it is best to give the new product to the
clients who have been using the shampoo to be replaced. If they believe that the new
product is equally as good or better than the old one, the change can be made.
Antiseborrheics are commercially available in various combinations.l" 35 The clinician
must decide which combination of drugs to use and needs to know each drug's actions
and concentrations. Ideal therapeutic response depends on the correct choice, but variations among individual patients do occur. For dry and scaly seborrhea (seborrhea sicca), a
different preparation is needed than for oily and greasy seborrhea (seborrhea oleosa).
Sulfur, for instance, is useful in dry seborrhea, but is not a good degreaser. Benzoyl
peroxide, on the other hand, degreases well, but can be too keratolytic and drying for dry,
brittle skin. The following discussion may help the clinician understand the differences
and uses, and help distinguish the correct medication from among the myriad of commercially available pharmaceuticals.
Antiseborrheic drugs include keratolytic and keratoplastic ingredients. Keratolytic
agents facilitate decreased cohesion among corneocytes, desquamation, and shedding,
resulting in a softening of the stratum corneum with easy removal of scale. They do not
dissolve keratin. Keratoplastic agents attempt to renormalize the keratinization and abnormal epithelialization that is present in keratinization disorders. The complete mechanism
of these effects is not known, although some keratoplastic agents (particularly tar) are
believed to normalize epidermal proliferation by decreasing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
production with a resultant decrease in the mitotic index of the epidermal basal cells.
Follicular flushing is a term used to describe agents that help remove follicular secretions,
remove bacteria, and decrease follicular hyperkeratosis. The most common major ingredients in antiseborrheic shampoos include tars, sulfur, salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide, and
selenium sulfide. Other commonly included active agents are urea, glycerine, and lactic
acid. In an ultrasonographic biomicroscopic study of the ability of shampoos to remove
scale from the skin of dogs,44 selenium sulfide and colloidal oatmeal were the most
effective, tar and sulfur-salicylic acid were moderately effective, and benzoyl peroxide,
ethyl lactate, and chlorhexidine were ineffective.
Sulfur is both keratoplastic and keratolytic, probably through the interaction of sulfur
with cysteine in keratinocytes. It is a mild follicular flushing agent, but not a good
degreaser. Sulfur is also antibacterial, antifungal, and antiparasitic, and these actions are
attributed to the formation of pentathionic acid and hydrogen sulfide. The smaller the
sulfur particles are (colloidal are smaller than precipitated), the greater the efficacy. The
best keratolytic action occurs when sulfur is incorporated in petrolatum. This is in sharp
contrast to the findings with salicylic acid, which produces its effect faster when employed
in an emulsion base. The keratolytic effect of sulfur results from its superficial effect on
the horny layer and the formation of hydrogen sulfide. The keratoplastic effect is caused
by the deeper action of the sulfur on the basal layer of the epidermis and by the
formation of cystine.
In the shampoos marketed in North America by the well-recognized manufacturers of
dermatologicals, a pure sulfur product cannot be purchased. Because of the synergistic
activity between sulfur and salicylic acid, all "sulfur" shampoos contain both ingredients.
Popular sulfur shampoos include DermaPet Seborrheic shampoo (DermaPet), SebaLyt
(DVM Pharmaceuticals), SeboRx (DVM Pharmaceutucals), Micro Pearls Advantage
SebaMoist shampoo (EVSCO), Micropearls Advantage SebaHex shampoo (EVSCO), and
Sebolux (Virbac),
Salicylic acid (0.1% to 2%) is keratoplastic and exerts a favorable influence on the new
formation of the keratinous layer. It is also mildly antipruritic and bacteriostatic. In
stronger concentrations (3% to 6%), it solubilizes the intercellular "cement," thus acting as

Keratinization Defects • 1027

a keratolytic agent, causing shedding and softening of the stratum corneum. When salicylic
acid is combined with sulfur, it is believed that a synergistic effect occurs. A common
combination is a 2% to 6% concentration of each drug. In human dermatologic practice, a
40% salicylic acid plaster is used to treat calluses and warts.
Tar preparations are derived from destructive distillation of bituminous coal or wood.
Birch tar, juniper tar, and coal tar are crude products listed in order of increasing capacity
to irritate. Coal tar solution (5%, 10%, or 20%) produces a milder, more readily managed
effect. Coal tar solution contains only 20% of the coal tar present in coal tar extract or
refined tar. Most pharmaceutical preparations for dermatologic use have been highly
refined to decrease the staining effect and the strong odor. In this refining process, some
of the beneficial effects of tar are lost, and its potential carcinogenic danger is also
decreased. Unadulterated tar products have no place in small animal practice because of
their toxicity and tendency to cause local irritation. Cats are especially sensitive to coal tar.
All tars are odiferous, potentially irritating and photosensitizing, and carcinogenic. Some
tars may stain light-colored coats. In one of the author's (DWS) experience, tars are the
most irritating topical antiseborrheic medications in veterinary dermatology, and he does
not use tar-containing topical preparations.
Tar shampoos are widely used, however, and seem to be helpful in managing seborrhea. They are keratolytic, keratoplastic, and mildly degreasing. As with sulfur shampoos,
tar products usually contain other ingredients, usually sulfur and salicylic acid. Two pure
tar products are marketed: Clear Tar shampoo (VRx) and Micro Pearls Advantage Tar
Moisturizing shampoo (EVSCO). Popular combination products include LyTar (DVM
Pharmaceuticals), NuSal T (DVM Pharmaceuticals), Mycodex High Potency Tar and Sulfur shampoo (Pfizer), Mycodex Tar and Sulfur Pet shampoo (Pfizer), Allerseb-T (Virbac),
and T-Lux (Virbac).
Benzoyl peroxide (2.5% to 5%) is keratolytic, antibacterial, degreasing, antipruritic,
and follicular flushing. It is metabolized in the skin to benzoic acid, which lyses intercellular substance in the horny layer to account for its keratolytic effect. It is not a stable
ingredient and should not be repackaged, diluted, or mixed with other products. Benzoyl
peroxide is drying, can induce a contact dermatitis (in less than 10% of patients), and
bleaches hair, clothing, and furniture. Skin tumor-promoting activity has been documented in laboratory rodents, but no such activity has been documented in any other
species.P

Benzoyl peroxide is available as a 5% gel (OxyDex, DVM Pharmaceuticals) and
(Pyoben, Virbac) and as a 2.5% to 3% shampoo (DermaPet Benzoyl Peroxide shampoo,
DermaPet; OxyDex, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Micro Pearls Advantage Benzoyl-plus shampoo, EVSCO; Mycodex Benzoyl Peroxide Pet shampoo, Pfizer; and Pyoben, Virbac). Two
products are available that also contain sulfur (DermaPet Benzoyl Peroxide Plus shampoo,
DermaPet; SulfOxyDex, DVM Pharmaceuticals). Only reputable benzoyl peroxide products should be used, because poor products have short shelf lives, little activity, or
increased irritation potential. Because of its potent degreasing action, benzoyl peroxide
excessively dries out normal skin with prolonged use, and it is generally contraindicated in
the presence of dry skin or significant irritation, or both. 56 A study showed that benzoyl
peroxide combined with a liposome-based (Novasome microvesicles) humectant (Micro
Pearls Advantage Benzoyl Peroxide shampoo) eliminates or minimizes this drying effect."
Pyoben, because of its spherulite formulation, should also be minimally drying.
Selenium sulfide alters the epidermal turnover rate and interferes with the hydrogen
bond formation in keratin. It is keratolytic, keratoplastic, and very degreasing. At this
writing, there are no selenium sulfide shampoos marketed specifically for veterinary use in
North America. The human product that contains 1% selenium sulfide (Selsun Blue,
Abbot Laboratories) is effective in dogs and usually is not too irritating.
In human medicine, there are dozens of keratolytic and keratoplastic agents marketed
in the cream, gel, or ointment formulation. Very few are marketed in veterinary medicine,
and most are generic products, e.g. 10% sulfur ointment, ichthammol ointment, zinc
oxide, and thuja or those marketed for other purposes, for example, petroleum jelly, udder
balm. KeraSolv Gel (DVM Pharmaceuticals) contains 6.6% salicylic acid, 5% sodium

I 028 • Keratinization Defects

lactate, and 5% urea in a propylene glycol gel and is an effective local treatment for
hyperkeratotic lesions, for example, nasal hyperkeratosis.
In the process of removing the excessive scale or grease, antiseborrheic products can
damage the stratum corneum and alter the hydration of the epidermis. IO - 13 Excessively
low humidity can cause similar alterations. Emollients and moisturizers are used to counteract these effects.
Emollients are agents that soften or soothe the skin, whereas moisturizers increase
the water content of the stratum corneum. Both types of drugs are useful in hydrating
and softening the skin. Many of the occlusive emollients are actually oils (safflower,
sesame, and mineral oil) or contain lanolin. These emollients decrease transepidermal
water loss and cause moisturization. These agents work best if they are applied immediately after saturation of the stratum corneum with water. For maximal softening, the skin
should be hydrated in wet dressings, dried, and covered with an occlusive hydrophobic oil.
The barrier to water loss can be further strengthened by covering the local lesion with
plastic wrap under a bandage. Nonocclusive emollients are relatively ineffective in retaining moisture. Examples of emollients include vegetable oils (olive, cottonseed, com, and
peanut oil), animal oils (lard, whale oil, anhydrous lanolin, and lanolin with 25% to 30%
water), silicones, hydrocarbons (paraffin and petrolatum [mineral oil]), and waxes (white
wax [bleached beeswax], yellow wax [beeswax], and spermaceti). Hygroscopic (humectant)
agents are moisturizers that work by being incorporated into the stratum corneum and
attracting water. These agents draw water from the deep epidermis and dermis, and from
the environment if the relative humidity is greater than 70%.18 These agents, such as
propylene glycol, glycerin, colloidal oatmeal, urea, sodium lactate, and lactic acid, may also
be applied between baths. Both occlusive and hygroscopic agents are found in a variety of
veterinary spray and cream rinse formulations, which are matched to a corresponding
shampoo, for example, HyLyt"efa cream rinse and shampoo (DVM Pharmaceuttcalsl.l''r "
The addition of novasomes or spherulites to veterinary antiseborrheics has increased
the efficacy of the products while decreasing the labor intensity of the treatments. As
discussed in Chapter 3, these are tiny capsules incorporated into shampoos that adhere to
the skin and hair and remain there after rinsing. In a time-dependent fashion, some of the
capsules disintegrate and release either water and lipids (novasomes) or active ingredients
with or without moisturizers (spherulites). Because of the newness of these products, the
number of studies documenting their efficacy is limited. In one study, Micro Pearls
Advantage Hydra-Pearls Cream Rinse (EVSCO) was shown to be superior to a traditional
humectant emollient (Humilac, Virbac) for the treatment of dry skin in dogs. 54 In a study
on epidermal hydration, nine dogs had areas of their skin treated with water or Sebolux
(Virbac), a sulfur/salicylic acid shampoo with spherulites. The shampoo-treated area had
greater hydration than either the control or water-treated areas." These preliminary data
suggest that these modified shampoos have prolonged periods of action, and that cream
rinses may be an unnecessary step in many treatment protocols.
Systemic antiseborrheic agents are used primarily in the treatment of the congenitohereditary seborrheic disorders (see Chapter 12). Because most of the generalized secondary seborrheas are due to altered environmental conditions, dietary deficiency, metabolic
abnormalities, or other correctable disorders, systemic treatments are rarely considered
and probably would be of little value. These agents might be of some value in those
idiopathic conditions in which the defect appears to be due to altered keratinization, for
example, feline acne.
Retinoids are the most commonly used systemic antiseborrheic agents in veterinary
medicine. Retinoids refer to all the chemicals, natural or synthetic, that have vitamin A
activity. Synthetic retinoids are primarily retinol, retinoic acid, or retinal derivatives or
analogs. They have been developed with the intent of amplifYing certain biologic effects
while being less toxic than their natural precursors. More than 1500 synthetic retinoids
have been developed and evaluated. 37• 46 Different synthetic drugs, all classed as synthetic
retinoids, may have profoundly different pharmacologic effects, side effects, and disease
indications.
Naturally occurring vitamin A is an alcohol, all-trans retinol. It is oxidized in the body

Keratinization Defects • 1029

to retinal and retinoic acid. Each of these compounds has variable metabolic and biological activities, although both are important in the induction and maintenance of normal
growth and differentiation of keratinocytes. Only retinol has all of the known functions of
vitamin A. The two most widely used retinoids in veterinary dermatology were isotretinoin
(13-cis-retinoic acid; Accutane, Roche), synthesized as a natural metabolite of retinol, and
etretinate (Tegison, Roche), a synthetic retinoid. Etretinate is no longer available because
tissue residues in humans can persist for years after drug withdrawal and might result in
fetal defects.P It was replaced with acitretin (Soriatane, Roche), a free-acid metabolite of
etretinate. Acitretin appears to be comparable to etretinate in efficacy and acute toxicity,
but because it has a much shorted terminal elimination half-life (2 days versus etretinate's
100 days), its long-term safety should be better. It is available in 10- and 25-mg liquidfilled capsules, which come in prescription packs of 30 capsules. At this writing, each
capsule costs between $8.00 and $10.00. To date, the only information available on its
efficacy in dogs comes from anecdotal reports on the Internet. It appears to be as safe
and effective as etretinate when given at 1 mg/kg q24h. Unless it is shown that lower
dosages are equally as effective, the expense of acitretin will preclude its use.
The biological effects of retinoids are numerous and diverse, but their ability to
regulate proliferation, growth, and differentiation of epithelial tissues is their major benefit
in dermatology. They also affect proteases, prostaglandins, humoral and cellular immunity,
and cellular adhesion and communication.v' Isotretinoin is usually given in a dose of 1 to
3 mg/kg q12 to 24h hours and appears to be indicated in diseases that require alteration
or normalization of adnexal structures, although some epidermal diseases may respond."
Diseases in which isotretinoin has been reported to be effective in veterinary dermatology
include Schnauzer comedo syndrome." sebaceous adenitis (particularly early in the disease
in Poodles and Vizslas or shorthaired breeds),37, 46, 61 ichthyosis,"? feline acne.F epitheliotropic lymphoma.": 46, 6,5 keratoacanthoma.s" 37, 46, 61 and sebaceous gland hyperplasias
and adenomas/" Isotretinoin has been ineffective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of
Cocker spaniels and Basset hounds, and epidermal dysplasia of West Highland White
terriers.s- 37, 46 It was also ineffective in the treatment of preneoplastic and squamous cell
carcinoma lesions in cats. 20
Toxicity of isotretinoin in the dog and cat appears to be less of a problem than in
humans.Fi " In the dog, conjunctivitis, hyperactivity, pruritus, pedal and mucocutaneous
junction erythema, stiffness, vomiting, diarrhea, and keratoconjunctivitis may be noted.
Laboratory abnormalities that are generally not associated with clinical signs include
hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, and increased levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase.f" 46 In cats, conjunctivitis, diarrhea, anorexia, and vomiting have been the major side effects noted.V 46, 59 These side
effects may be transient or self-limited with discontinuation or decrease in dose of the
drug. With long-term use, skeletal abnormalities, including cortical hyperostosis, periosteal
calcification, and long bone demineralization, are a concern. 19, 37, 45. 46 All retinoids are
potent teratogens.
Etretinate or acitretin are indicated in disorders of epithelial or follicular development
or kerattnization." Most commonly, etretinate is given at 1 mg/kg every 24 hours. Etretinate is reportedly effective for primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker and Springer
spaniels.s" 46, 59 Golden retrievers, Irish setters, and some mixed breeds. It has not been
effective in most West Highland White terriers, Basset hounds, or collies.i" 46 but exceptions have been noted. 59 Etretinate can also be effective in the treatment of ichthyosis,
solar dermatitis, squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthomas, and sebaceous adenitis. 26 , 40,
46, 59 Dogs with follicular dysplasias such as color dilution alopecia may also respond with
less scaling and partial hair growth. 26
Toxicity with etretinate is similar to that seen with isotretinoin. In humans, etretinate
is considered safer for long-term use because of a lower propensity for producing skeletal
abnormalities. However, it is considered more of a teratogen and should be used only in
spayed females, nonbreeding males, or female dogs that will not be used for breeding.
Teratogenicity may persist even 2 years after cessation of therapy.v- 46 Monitoring for both
synthetic retinoids includes pretreatment measurement of tear production, hemogram,

1030 • Keratinization Defects

chemistry profile, and urinalysis. This is repeated in 1 to 2 months and, if no problems are
detected, then repeated only as deemed necessary.v' Because experience with increased
triglyceride levels shows that they normalize when animals are receiving low-fat diets, it is
recommended that dogs being given etretinate may benefit from changing to such a diet. 46
A topical (calcipotriene or calcipotriol) or systemic vitamin D analog, especially 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D 3 (calcitrol), is used in the treatment of psoriasis in humans'< 25, 39, 47, 48
and a preliminary clinical trial was conducted in a small number of Cocker spaniels with
primary seborrhea." These agents were developed to maintain the positive impact of
vitamin D on keratinization but minimize the hormonal influence on calcium and phosphorus metabolism. Vitamin D analogs inhibit keratinocyte proliferation, induce terminal
differentiation of keratinocytes, and decrease immunologic reactivity by reduced production or transcription of various cytokines and reduced antigen-presenting function of
Langerhans cells. 15, 25, 39 When calcitrol was given at 10 nglkg q24h to seborrheic Cocker
spaniels, significant improvement was noted in approximately two thirds of the dogs. 38 No
adverse reactions were noted, but because these compounds influence calcium metabolism
and accidental overdosing can be fatal," the patient should have its PTH, calcium, and
phosphorus levels monitored at least weekly.
Cytostatic or cytotoxic drugs have received wide usage in humans with psoriasis.P The
most recent addition to the armamentarium is oral cyclosporine, which improves the
clinical lesions by downregulating the proinflammatory epidermal cytokines.f Because
cytotoxic treatments have anecdotal efficacy in the treatment of primary seborrhea in
dogs59 and cyclosporine is receiving wider usage in this species, cyclosporine might have
some place in the treatment of serious disorders of keratinization.

• CANINE SEBORRHEA
Seborrhea is a chronic skin disease of dogs that is characterized by a defect in keratinization with increased scale formation, excessive greasiness of the skin and haircoat, and
sometimes by secondary inflammation. Some patients are both flaky and greasy, depending
on the region of the body involved. Ingrained in the veterinary literature are the terms
seborrhea sicca, seborrhea oleosa, and seborrheic dermatitis. Seborrhea sicca denotes
dryness of the skin and coat. There is focal or diffuse scaling of the skin with the
accumulation of white to gray nonadherent scales, and the coat is dull and dry (Fig. 14lA). Seborrhea oleosa is the opposite; the skin and hairs are greasy (see Fig. 14-1B). The
greasy keratosebaceous debris is best appreciated by touch and smell. The malodor of
dogs with severe seborrhea oleosa is tremendous. Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by
scaling and greasiness, with gross evidence of local or diffuse inflammation (see Fig. 14LC), It is often associated with folliculitis. Animals with seborrhea oleosa or seborrheic
dermatitis should be examined carefully for Malassezia yeast. The lipolytic nature of this
organism worsens an already greasy skin condition. In addition, Malassezia yeast increase
the proliferation rate of keratinocytes." creating a vicious circle. The initial seborrheic
condition encouraged yeast overgrowth, and then the yeast continue to stimulate seborrheic change. In advanced cases, the initial seborrheic condition could have been resolved,
but the patient's clinical condition will remain the same until the yeast are eliminated.
Classic localized seborrheic dermatitis has circular lesions with alopecia, erythema, marginal epidermal scaling, and later hyperpigmentation (see Fig. 14-1D). This condition
must be differentiated from other disorders that cause similar lesions.
These three terms appropriately describe the dog's clinical appearance and aid in
initial shampoo selection, but they cannot be used to direct the diagnostic effort to find
the cause of the seborrhea. Individuals respond to the same seborrheic insult in different
manners. Although most fatty acid-deficient dogs have dull, dry, and flaky coats, some are
greasy, and a dog with early generalized demodicosis may be either flaky or greasy.
Regardless of the nature of the seborrhea, all causes of seborrhea should be considered
and excluded only by the appropriate testing.
Etiologically, seborrhea is classified into primary and secondary types. Primary sebor-

Keratinization Defects • 103I

FIGURE 14-1. A, Severe flaking in a dog with a fatty acid deficiency. B, Greasy seborrhea in a dog with
chronic liver disease. Note that the greasy material adheres to the hairs and stains them. C, Diffuse seborrheic
dermatitis in a hypothyroid dog. D, Focal seborrheic dermatitis in a dog with vitamin A-responsive dermatosis.
E, Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in a Cocker spaniel. Marked comedo formation on the abdomen. F,
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis. Same dog as in E. Close-up of follicular plugging. G, Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis. Same dog as in E and F. Severe ceruminous otitis extema. H, Flaking in a cat caused by too low
an environmental humidity level.

1032 • Keratinization Defects

rhea is an inherited disorder of epidermal hyperproliferation and is discussed in Chapter
12. It is most commonly seen in American Cocker spaniels, English Springer spaniels,
West Highland White terriers, and Basset hounds, but Irish setters, Doberman pinschers,
Chinese Shar peis, dachshunds, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds are at increased risk.34 • 59 However, not all individuals within those breeds are affected. A veterinarian does the owner and animal a great injustice if seborrheic signs in a dog of those
breeds are immediately classified as primary seborrhea. The diagnosis of primary seborrhea is tenable only if the signs started early in life and appropriate diagnostic tests have
failed to reveal a cause for the keratinization defect.
Secondary seborrheas are those caused by some external or internal insult that alters
the proliferation, differentiation, or desquamation of the surface and follicular epithelium." Virtually any disorder discussed in this textbook can result in seborrheic signs
during the acute or healing phase of the disease.

Cause and Pathogenesis
Any disorder that alters cellular proliferation, differentiation, or desquamation produces
seborrheic signs. In most instances, the mechanisms by which the following seborrheainducing factors cause their changes are incompletely understood.
• Inflammation. Inflammatory skin diseases are typically characterized by epidermal
hyperplasia.F which probably results from the release or production of dermal eicosanoids,
histamine, and cytokines. Leukotriene B4 (LTB 4 ) concentrations have been reported to be
increased in the skin lesions of dogs with seborrhea." Both LTB 4 and prostaglandin E 2
increase DNA synthesis in the basal layer and stimulate epidermal proliferation.t" 62 If the
inflammation is mild, seborrheic signs can develop in the absence of pruritus. Examples
include grooming that is too vigorous,2 demodicosis, dermatophytosis, cheyletiellosis, lice,
low-grade contact dermatitis, and early epitheliotropic lymphoma.
• Endocrine Factors. Hormones influence cellular proliferation'" and serum and
cutaneous lipid profiles.v 60 Although all hormonal imbalances can cause seborrhea, spontaneous or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism are the most common
causes (see Chap. 10). In hyperadrenocorticism, other signs of the disease are usually
present; in contrast, some hypothyroid dogs are perfectly normal aside from the seborrhea.
• Nutritional Factors. Glucose, protein, essential fatty acids," 14 and various vitamins
and trace minerals are necessary for normal cellular proliferation and differentiation,
Deficiency, excess, or imbalance in one or more of these nutrients can produce seborrhea
(see Chap. 17). Because the vast majority of pets in developed countries eat high-quality,
balanced diets, nutritional seborrheas are very uncommon." When they do occur, they
usually are secondary to malabsorption or maldigestion'" or metabolic disease, especially
hypothyroidism."
• Environmental Factors. The water and lipid content of the skin is important to
maintain normal invisible desquamation.v'-l- 33 If transepidermal water loss increases,
desquamation changes and the squames (packets of dead cells) become visible. Low
environmental humidity, excessive bathing (especially with harsh products), and fatty acid
deficiency can produce this change.
As can be seen from the above-mentioned factors, virtually any disease can cause
seborrhea and can do so by many different mechanisms.

Clinical Features
The clinical signs of secondary seborrhea include flakiness, greasiness, seborrheic dermatitis, ceruminous otitis extema, or some combination of these. The nature, distribution, and
severity of the signs depend on the cause of the seborrhea and the individual patient. In
general, systemic causes (e.g., endocrine disease, dietary deficiency, hepatic or gastrointestinal disease, and primary or secondary lipid abnormalities) result in generalized signs that

Keratinization Defects • 1033

FIGURE 14-2. Secondary seborrhea. Dishevelment of the coat with
seborrheic change in the saddle and
flank region of a puppy.

are not pruritic at their onset. These animals can become pruritic, however, as the
seborrhea worsens or if there is a secondary staphylococcal or Malassezia overgrowth.
They often have more pronounced seborrheic changes around the face, feet (especially
interdigitally), intertriginous areas, and perineum. Allergic disorders, although systemic
diseases, tend to cause regionalized seborrheic changes, and pruritus precedes the seborrheic changes.
Except for low environmental humidity and overzealous or inappropriate topical treatments (e.g., excessive bathing, dipping, or powdering, contact dermatitis to a shampoo),
external causes (e.g., cheyletiellosis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis) result in focal, multifocal, or regionalized signs of secondary seborrhea (Figs. 14-2 and 14-3). At examination,
these dogs have areas of normal skin. Sebaceous adenitis, a disorder that results in the
destruction of most, if not all, sebaceous glands often is initially regionalized to the face
and dorsum of the trunk.

FIGURE 14-3. Close-up of the
puppy in Figure 14-2. Note the
large flakes of scale riding up the
hair shafts. This seborrheic change is
fairly common iu puppies and usually resolves spontaneously by 3
months of age.

1034 • Keratinization Defects

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of seborrhea is straightforward and is based on the characteristic lesions.
Determining the cause of the seborrhea is far more difficult. Beyond the mandatory
history, dietary review, skin scrapings, trichography, and fecal examinations for intestinal
parasites and evidence of malabsorption or maldigestion, the specific diagnostic approach
varies from case to case.
Some investigators perform skin biopsies early in the diagnostic effort; others perform
routine laboratory and endocrine testing first. If the seborrhea is focal, multifocal, or
regionalized, and trichography shows numerous hair casts (Fig. 14-4), an indication of
abnormal follicular keratinization, an early biopsy is indicated to characterize the external
insult. When the seborrhea is generalized and probably attributable to some systemic
disease, an early biopsy is not necessary. In this case, the tissues would show the characteristic changes of a keratinization defect; for example, a variably hyperplastic superficial
perivascular dermatitis with orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis may be found,
but biopsy would be unlikely to reveal the cause of such changes.
Dogs with a generalized seborrhea, especially older dogs whose symptoms are of
recent onset, should have hemography, a chemistry profile, and Urinalysis performed to
aid in the initial characterization of any systemic disease. Any abnormality detected should
be followed in an appropriate manner. If that testing and the basic in-office tests are
noncontributory, a thyroid or adrenal evaluation, or both, should be performed.
If the seborrheic lesions are focal, multifocal, or regionalized, an external cause is
likely. If the history and physical examination do not result in a short list of differential
diagnoses, a skin biopsy is useful in categorizing the disorder.
As mentioned before, seborrheic dogs are prone to secondary staphylococcal infections and Malassezia dermatitis. If either of these conditions is identified by physical
examination and exudative cytologic examination, they should be resolved before skin

FIGURE 14-4. Follicular cast,
which is an accumulation of keratin
and follicular material that adheres
to the hair shaft extending above the
surface of the follicular ostia. It is a
primary lesion in vitamin A-responsive dermatoses, primary idiopathic
seborrhea, and sebaceous adenitis.
(Photograph illustrates hair epilated
from a dog with sebaceous adenitis;
the clumps of material at the base of
multiple hairs are the casts.) Follicular casts may be secondary lesions in
demodectic mange and dermatophytosis.

Keratinization Defects • 1035
biopsies are taken because the inflammation caused by these infections can mask some of
the subtle histologic features of the underlying disease.

Clinical Management
The primary aim of treatment in secondary seborrhea is the correction of its cause. With
treatment, the seborrheic signs should resolve spontaneously in 30 to 60 days; in chronic
cases, however, a complete response may not occur for 3 to 4 months. Because seborrheic
dogs are prone to secondary staphylococcal infections or Malassezia dermatitis, appropriate
treatment may be necessary if the dog is infected. Resolution of these secondary infections and the underlying cause of the seborrhea can result in very rapid improvement.
The topical agents used in primary seborrhea are also used here, but treatment
protocols in correctable secondary seborrhea are less intense.l" 33, 35 The response in longhaired dogs and cats is dramatically improved if the coat is clipped. Typically, the dog is
bathed, with or without moisturization, twice weekly for 1 to 2 weeks. Very greasy dogs
may require alternate-day bathing for 2 to 3 weeks. No specific protocol should be
mandated, because the response of secondarily seborrheic dogs is quite variable once
treatment of the underlying cause has been instituted. As in primary seborrhea, overbathing a dog with secondary seborrhea exacerbates the seborrhea. The client is in the
best position to determine when the dog needs a treatment. If the dog is not too flaky or
greasy on its scheduled bath day, the treatment should be postponed until the surface
debris builds up to an unacceptable level. As the treatment for the underlying disease
progresses, the bathing interval increases. The baths can often be stopped after 30 days.
At that point, the dog may not be entirely normal, but many owners find the residual
disease acceptable, especially if bathing the dog has been very difficult.
In most cases, the thorough bathing and drying of a seborrheic animal is a labor
intense process that takes 30 minutes or more. Although some owners will follow any
bathing protocol, most want to bathe their pet as infrequently as possible. In this scenario,
shampoo selection is very important and an inappropriate choice can harm the patient.
For example, most benzoyl peroxide products are contraindicated in patients with dry skin
because the degreasing potential of these agents will exacerbate the dryness. If there are
specific indications for the use of the benzoyl peroxide product in the patient, the
frequency of use must be monitored carefully because dryness and irritation will occur if
the product is used more often than the patient's skin will tolerate. In general, the milder
the shampoo, the slower the patient's response time, but the greater the margin of safety.
Dogs or cats with dry skin and coat can be bathed with a variety of different
products, and product selection depends on client and veterinarian preference." Commonly used types of product include hypoallergenic grooming products (DermaPet All
Natural Condition Shampoo [Dermal'et], D-Basic shampoo [DVM Pharmaceuticals],
HyLyt"efa Hypoallergenic Moisturizing shampoo [DVM Pharmaceuticals], Micro Pearls
Advantage Hydra-Pearls shampoo [EVSCO], or Allergroom shampoo [Virbac]), colloidal
oatmeal products (DermaPet Oatmeal shampoo [DermaPet], Epi-Soothe [Virbacj), or
emollient-based chlorhexidine products (ChlorhexiDerm Maximum shampoo [DVM Pharmaceuticals], Nolvasan shampoo [Fort Dodge], and Hexidine [Virbac]). With the high
frequency of secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections in seborrheic dogs, the latter
shampoos receive frequent use in dry dogs. In many cases, a bath once or twice a week is
sufficient to keep the visible scales to a minimum. Unless the shampoo being used
contains novasomes or spherulites, a cream rinse should be applied to the skin to increase
its hydration. In most instances, the grooming shampoos have their own matching cream
rinse.
With more severe seborrheic signs (e.g., intense flaking, severe hyperkeratosis, or
greasiness of varying severity), alternative shampoos must be selected and selection is
based on the severity of the seborrheic signs. Greasy dogs are most problematic and
usually require strong shampoos. To save money and increase the efficacy of the antiseborrheic product, the patient should be given a quick bath with a nonmedicated grooming
shampoo. This bath removes the dirt and surface material from the coat and skin, and

1036 • Keratinization Defects

thus allows better contact of the antiseborrheic product with the skin. In general, the
sulfur and salicylic acid products are less potent than the pure tar products, and those are
less potent than the tar combination products. Benzoyl peroxide, with or without sulfur,
and the selenium sulfide shampoos are the most potent and can remove a tremendous
amount of scale and grease with just one bath. In addition to decreasing the surface lipids,
strong tars, selenium sulfide, and benzoyl peroxide shampoos increase transepidermal
water loss and must be used cautiously.!" 12. 55
After the quick cleansing bath, the antiseborrheic product should be applied. Owners
should be cautioned not to apply a heavy strip of shampoo down the animal's back. This
all too common technique wastes shampoo and can irritate the skin on the dorsum
because it is difficult to rinse all of the product from the skin. With concentrated
shampoos, the client should be instructed to put an ounce or so of the shampoo into a
container of warm water. This shampoo solution is then sparingly poured over the dog.
Shampoos marketed in spray bottles are also designed to more evenly disperse the
shampoo.
After the dog has been lathered with the antiseborrheic product, the shampoo must
remain in contact with the skin for 10 to 15 minutes for maximum effect. Gentle
manipulation of the dog's skin during this waiting period tends to keep the dog content
and increases the cleansing action of the shampoo. After 10 to 15 minutes, the dog should
be rinsed thoroughly. It should take two to three times longer for the rinsing than it did
for the lathering. Prolonged rinsing not only removes the debris and shampoo but also
aids in hydration of the skin. Many dry dogs become flaky again soon after the bath,
especially when the environmental humidity is low. The application of an after-bath cream
rinse or emollient spray helps provide a barrier to transepidermal water loss and its
associated drying. 54 Although any after-bath rinse can be effective, studies have shown that
those containing oils, and especially linoleic acid, are most effective in decreasing transepidermal water 10ss.11 If the client keeps some diluted product in a misting bottle and
sprays it on the dog as needed, the frequency of bathing can often be reduced.
For greasy dogs, the shampoos used are stronger. 24 • 35 Greasy dogs often need an
after-bath rinse, especially if the humidity level is low. All strong shampoos can disrupt
the epidermal barrier and increase transepidermal water loss, with resultant worsening of
the seborrhea. 11 An afterbath rinse can prevent this, but it may make the dog too greasy.
Each case must be approached on its own merits.
In occasional cases, the cause of the secondary seborrhea can be identified but not
corrected; common examples include low winter humidity and intentional fatty acid deficiency for weight loss or control of pancreatitis or abnormalities in lipid metabolism. In
these cases, bathing and moisturizing must be continued at some maintenance level. The
application of moisturizers containing fat can be beneficial in these animals.'?

• VITAMIN A-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS
A vitamin A-responsive dermatosis has been described primarily in Cocker spaniels, but it
has also been recognized in a Labrador retriever and a miniature Schnauzer.s" 30. 43. .'51 . .'52
In these dogs, the condition is characterized by an adult-onset, medically refractory
seborrheic skin disease, wherein marked follicular plugging and hyperkeratotic plaques
with surface fronds are typically seen (see Fig. 14-1E and F). The follicular plugging and
hyperkeratotic plaques are especially prominent on the ventral and lateral chest and
abdomen. Other lesions include varying degrees of focal crusting, scaling, alopecia, and
follicular papules. A ceruminous otitis extema is usually present (see Fig. 14-1G). A
generally dry, dull, disheveled, easily epilated haircoat is present, along with a rancid skin
odor and mild to moderate pruritus. Except for the skin disease, the dogs are generally
healthy.
K. W. Kwochka (personal communications) and the authors have recognized a group
of Gordon setters with a vitamin A- responsive condition that differs in its clinical presentation. Instead of a seborrheic presentation, these dogs have a pruritic disorder, especially

Keratinization Defects • 1037

over their dorsums, with a papular dermatitis in the pruritic regions. Treatment with
antibiotics resolves the papular dermatitis and lessens the pruritus but a relapse can be
expected when the antibiotic is withdrawn. Allergy testing is inconclusive, and skin biopsies show the disproportionate follicular hyperkeratosis of vitamin A- responsive dermatosis. Treatment with vitamin A alcohol results in resolution of the rash and pruritus, and
the dog remains normal with continued treatment.
The marked follicular plugging that occurs in these dogs is highly suggestive of this
disease. In the absence of systemic signs of hyperadrenocorticism, only sebaceous adenitis
(see Chap. 18), true vitamin A deficiency or hypervitaminosis A (see Chap. 17), atypical
generalized demodicosis (see Chap. 6), and follicular dysplasia (see Chaps. 11 and 12)
produce such profound follicular changes. The clinical lesions are characterized histologically by profound, disproportionately marked follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig.
14-5). At present, the final diagnosis of vitamin A-responsive dermatosis can be confirmed only by response to treatment.
Treatment consists of 10,000 U vitamin A (retinol) given orally, once daily with a fatty
meal. Improvement can be expected in 3 weeks, with complete clinical remission in 8 to
10 weeks. Treatment should be continued for life because the lesions and symptoms
reappear when treatment is discontinued.

FIGURE 14-5. Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis. Disproportionate orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis of multiple hair follicles.

1038 • Keratinization Defects

• FELINE SEBORRHEA
Primary seborrhea is very rare in cats (see Chap. 12). Although cats suffer from many of
the disorders that cause secondary seborrhea in dogs." seborrheic signs are uncommon in
this species. Cats' fastidious grooming habits, which remove scales quickly, may be partially responsible for this lower incidence.
When cats do become seborrheic, they usually have seborrhea sicca, with fine white
or gray flakes and scales in the coat (see Fig. 14-1H). When the signs are fairly generalized and the cat is not pruritic, dietary deficiency, intestinal parasitism, low environmental
humidity, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, cheyletiellosis, and pediculosis are the primary differentials. 5 1, 59 Contact dermatitis and overzealous shampooing or powdering could
be added to the list, but these causes are easily excluded through the history. With
pruritus or more localized lesions, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, lymphocytic mural
folliculitis (see Chap. 11), and allergy must be considered. Greasy seborrheic signs (seborrhea oleosa) (Fig. 14-6A) are extraordinarily rare in the cat and usually indicate severe
chronic hepatic, pancreatic, or intestinal disease, drug eruption, or systemic lupus erythematosus. 5 1• 59 As in dogs, some cats with the disorders just mentioned will have dry flaky
skin (Fig. 14-7), so anyone disease cannot be included or excluded just on the nature of
the seborrheic change.
As in dogs, correction of the cause for the seborrhea results in spontaneous resolution
of the signs. Bathing can help hasten the eat's response but is not widely done because
most cats are intolerant of repeated bathing. With the exception of products that contain
tar, selenium, quaternary ammonium compounds, or phenol, shampoos used on dogs can
also be used on cats. Caution is warranted with benzoyl peroxide, because it can cause
variable degrees of irritation in about 25% of the cats treated.

• NASODIGITAL HYPERKERATOSIS
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis is characterized by increased amounts of horny tissue originating from and tightly adherent to the epidermis of the footpads or nasal planum.

Cause and Pathogenesis
Hyperkeratosis of the nose, footpads, or both can occur as a congenitohereditary disorder,
an idiopathic entity, or as a coexistent feature of a variety of disorders. The idiopathic
form occurs most commonly in old dogs. It shows no breed or sex predilection and is
probably a senile changeP' 34, 59
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis can be seen in a variety of disorders but especially in the
congenitohereditary disorders of keratinization (see Chap. 12), distemper or leishmaniasis
(see Chap. 7), pemphigus foliaceus, drug reaction, or systemic lupus erythematosus (see
Chap. 9), zinc-responsive and generic dog food dermatosis (see Chap. 17), necrolytic
migratory erythema (see Chap. 10) and cutaneous lymphoma (see Chap. 20). With nasal
hyperkeratosis only, discoid lupus erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus (see Chap.
9) must be considered. If lesions are restricted to the pads, familial pad hyperkeratosisv'
(see Chap. 12) and papillomavirus infection (see Chap. 7) enter the list of differential
diagnoses. Except for familial pad hyperkeratosis and papillomavirus, all of the aforementioned disorders usually have lesions in the haired skin and often produce systemic signs
of illness. However, some cases have lesions restricted to the nose, footpads, or both,
either at their onset or during their entire course.

Clinical Features
The hyperplastic keratin that develops in senile nasodigital hyperkeratosis grows in a
variety of shapes, depending on its location, its stage of development, and the variation
among individual animals. At times, small verrucous keratin growths appear in a regular

Keratinization Defects • 1039

FIGURE 14-6. A, Greasy seborrhea in a cat with pancreatic insufficiency. B, Nasodigital hyperkeratosis. Note
the frondlike hyperkeratosis on the dorsum of the nasal planum. C, Nasodigital hyperkeratosis. Same dog as in
B. Keratin accumulation is most marked at the edges of the pads. D, Feline acne. Multiple comedones on the
chin. E, Ear margin dermatosis with marginal hypotrichosis and scaling. F, Canine tail galnd hyperplasia. G,
Feline tail gland hyperplasia. H, Parapsoriasis. Coalescent erythematous, scaly plaques on the abdomen of a dog.
A small island of normal skin is visible.

I 040 • Keratinization Defects

FIGURE 14-7. Dishevelment of
the coat with seborrhea sicca in a
cat with hepatitis.

pattern. At other times, the keratin is ridged, grooved, or feathered. Dryness is the
characteristic common to all lesions. The nasal planum, which is moist, black, soft, and
shiny in normal dogs, becomes hard, dry, rough, and hyperkeratotic, especially on the
dorsum of the nose (see Fig. 14-6B). Fissures, erosions, and ulcers develop in the dry
epidermal tissue.
The digital hyperkeratosis involves the entire surface of all pads but is most pronounced at the edges of weightbearing pads (see Fig. 14-6C) and on the accessory carpal
and tarsal pads. The contact surfaces of weightbearing pads are less involved because
friction during walking wears down the keratin. The hard, cracked pads contain excess
keratin tissue, which makes walking painful, especially for heavy dogs. Fissures and erosions add significantly to the discomfort. Corns form in the feet of some individuals
because excess keratin develops into deep, circular plaques.P These plaques press into the
surrounding footpad and cause pain when pressure is created as the animal walks.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of simple nasodigital hyperkeratosis can be straightforward or very complicated. If the typical lesions occur in an old dog with no other skin or systemic problems,
the diagnosis can be made on the basis of the clinical findings. If the nasodigital hyperkeratosis is present along with other skin lesions in a young to middle-aged dog, or if it
occurs with nasal or pedal depigmentation, erythema, erosion, and crusting, all of the
disorders mentioned previously must be considered and excluded by means of the appropriate testing.
The diagnosis is confirmed by a biopsy that reveals the characteristic features of
idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis and none of the features for the other differential
diagnoses. Histopathologic findings in idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis include irregular to papillated epidermal hyperplasia and marked orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

Clinical Management
Because the formation of excess keratin cannot be stopped, treatment must be lifelong
and directed toward the softening and removal of the excessive keratin. Because these
measures are time consuming and somewhat messy, they are usually reserved for patients
in which the hyperkeratosis causes discomfort or fissuring.

Keratinization Defects • I 04 I
Dogs with profound hyperkeratosis should have the excess keratin removed with
scissors or a razor blade. After appropriate instruction, many clients can perform the
trimming at home and may choose to use it as the sale method of treatment for
asymptomatic dogs. In most cases, the trimming is necessary only at the onset of treatment because further keratin buildup is minimized by the application of hydrating and
softening agents.
Topical treatment must include hydration and the application of a keratolytic agent.
Hydration of the pads is easily accomplished by soaking the feet in water and applying
wet compresses to the nose. After 5 to 10 minutes of hydration, the areas are covered
with keratolytic agent. Petroleum jelly, ichthamnol ointment, various human dry skin
lotions, 50% propylene glycol, 6.6% salicylic acid, 5% sodium lactate, and 5% urea in
propylene glycol gel (KeraSolv gel, DVM Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), and tretinoin gel (RetinA, Ortho) can all be effective. 34 , 41. 59 If petroleum jelly or ichthammol are used, the
animal must be confined to a crate or the feet must be bandaged so that floors, carpets,
and furniture are not stained. When the nose or pads are fissured, ointments containing
antibiotics and corticosteroids are indicated.
Typically, daily hydration and softening must be performed for 7 to 10 days to return
the nose and pads to near normal. The owners should be warned not to try to remove all
of the keratin, because overzealous treatment can remove the normal protective keratin
layer and predispose the nose and pads to lacerations and frictional ulcers. When the nose
and pads are near normal, some clients prefer to stop all treatments until significant
buildup occurs; others prefer to continue treatment once or twice weekly to prevent
buildup. Each case must be managed on its own merits. When topical treatment is
impossible, isotretinoin or etretinate therapy may be of some benefit, but their efficacy
remains unproven.r"

eACNE
In humans, acne is a multifactorial disease of the pilosebaceous unit. 22 Acne-prone individuals have an alteration in the pattern of follicular keratinization and produce more sebum
than do their normal counterparts. The levels of linoleic acid in sebum from an acne
patient are low. Bacteria (Propionibacterium acnes, Propionibacterium granulosum, and
micrococci) and yeast (Pityrosporum ovale) play an important contributory role through
their lipolytic action on sebum to produce free fatty acids, the production of inflammatory
enzymes (e.g., proteases), and the induction of follicular inflammation. Because androgens
stimulate sebum production, patients with systemic hormonal imbalances can have severe
acne. Acne patients have increased 5a-reductase activity in their skin. Because this enzyme system converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, local hormone influences are
probably very important.
Acne in dogs and cats is uncommon and has not been thoroughly studied." 50 Pets
with acne have abnormal follicular keratinization; beyond that, however, there probably is
little pathomechanistic similarity to human acne. For example, the comedonal lipid profiles from hairless dogs showed a predominance of free sterols, ceramides, and free fatty
acids." These lipids are of epidermal rather than sebaceous origin and suggest that the
sebaceous glands are minimally important in acne in dogs.

Canine Acne
Although skin lesions are fairly common in the skin of the chin and lips of young dogs, it
is doubtful that this is a true acne in which the defect in follicular keratinization arises de
novo. Careful inspection of the involved skin rarely reveals comedones; instead, sterile or
secondarily infected papules or furuncles are the primary lesions seen. In all likelihood,
canine acne is due to a traumatic follicular insult with resultant folliculitis. The subject is
discussed in detail under muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in Chapter 4.

1042 • Keratinization Defects

Feline Acne
Feline acne is an uncommon condition that affects cats of any breed or gender and is not
confined to adolescence.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

Feline acne is an idiopathic disorder of follicular keratinization.v 50. 51 Although some cats
experience only one episode during their lives, many affected cats have cyclic or nearconstant disease. Poor grooming habits, an underlying seborrheic predisposition, the production of abnormal sebum, hair cycle influences, stress, direct viral influences, and
immunosuppression have all been considered in the pathogenesis.t" 50. 66 Although each of
these would be an aggravating factor, none has been proven causal. Hormonal influences
probably play little or no role in the pathogenesis because cases are recognized with equal
frequency in males and females.P
CLINICAL FEATURES

The earliest lesions are crusts and comedones on the chin, the lower lip, and occasionally,
the upper lip (see Fig. 14-6D).66 At this stage, there are no symptoms associated with the
lesions, so they are often overlooked or ignored by the client. Some cases remain in the
comedonal stage, but others progress and develop papules and pustules. In severe cases, a
suppurative folliculitis, furunculosis, or cellulitis may develop (see Fig. 4-IOA) (Pasteurella
multocida, B-hemolytic streptococci, staphylococci, Malassezia, dermatophytesj." In severe
cases, the chin and lips can become edematous and thickened, and the cat often scratches
or rubs the chin on furniture or other rough surfaces. Regional lymphadenopathy may be
prominent. Follicular cysts of variable sizes and scarring are commonplace in chronic
cases.
DIAGNOSIS

In most cases, the diagnosis of feline acne is straightforward and is based on the presence
of classic lesions on the chin and lips. In the comedonal stage, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and Malassezia infection should be excluded by the appropriate tests. With furuncular lesions, primary or secondary bacterial or fungal infections should be considered and
documented by appropriate cytologic and cultural techniques. With pronounced chin
edema (the so-called fat chin), an eosinophilic granuloma with collagen flame figures must
be considered (see Chap. 18).
Histopathologic findings in feline acne include follicular keratosis, plugging, and dilatation (comedo),27 In advanced cases, perifolliculitis, folliculitis, and furunculosis with an
associated pyogranulomatous dermatitis may be seen (Fig. 14-8).
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

The need for treatment and intensity of treatment vary from case to case, If the owner
does not object to the presence of asymptomatic comedones, no treatment is required. If
the lesions are visually objectionable or if they progress to sterile or secondarily infected
papules or furuncles or induce pruritus, treatment is required.
Topical therapy is beneficial in all cases and is directed toward the dislodgement and
dissolution of the comedone. In many cases, the ease and efficacy of treatment can be
increased by clipping the area before treating it, If draining papules and furuncles are
admixed with the comedones, the area should be hot packed in a magnesium sulfate
(Epsom salt) solution (2 tbsp/quart or 30 mIlL warm water) for 5 to 10 minutes. Soaking
promotes drainage and softens the surrounding comedones. Because drainage typically
indicates secondary bacterial infection, appropriate antibiotics should be administered
orally for 14 to 21 days. Antibiotic selection depends on the invading organism, but
clavulanated amoxicillin, a fluoroquinolone, or a cephalosporin are good empiric choices.

Keratinization Defects • 1043

FIGURE 14-8. Feline acne. ruptured comedo (follicular plug) with surrounding pyogranulomatous dermatitis.

Topical treatment with mupirocin (see later) may alleviate the need for systemic antibiotics.
Although alcohol, various human acne cleaning pads, or Listerine antiseptic can be
effective comedolytic agents in cats, most investigators dispense antiseborrheic shampoos
for daily to twice-weekly use. Sulfur-salicylic acid, ethyl lactate, or benzoyl peroxide
products are used'- 50 Benzoyl peroxide has pronounced follicular flushing properties but
may be too irritating for some cats. Other topical products used in cats include vitamin A
acid (Retin-A 0.05% cream) and topical clindamycin, tetracycline, or erythromycin solutions or ointments.t" Topical metronidazole 0.75% gel has been reported to be useful,
perhaps through its combined antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties." Mupirocin
ointment applied twice daily can be very effectlve/" When 25 cats were treated, 24 had a
good to excellent response.
After all the papules and comedones have been eliminated, treatment should be
discontinued gradually over several weeks. Some cats remain free of lesions for extended
periods and others relapse. Once the amount of time that passes before relapse is known,
a maintenance cleaning program can be instituted. Those cats with recurrent acne may
benefit from fatty acid supplementation.s?
Aside from antibiotics and fat supplements, systemic therapy is rarely indicated. In
cats with severe inflammation, a 10- to 14-day course of oral prednisolone (1 to 2 mglkg
q24h) can be beneficial and may reduce scar tissue formation. Any bacterial infection
should be resolved before the corticosteroid is administered. Cats that do not allow topical
treatment or are refractory to it may benefit from the oral administration of isotretinoin (2
mglkglday).46,50 If response is to occur, it should be seen in 30 days. Approximately one
third of treated cats respond." Responders require long-term treatment, but the frequency of administration can often be reduced to every 2 or 3 days.

• CANINE EAR MARGIN DERMATOSIS
Marginal seborrhea affecting the pinna of the ear is characterized by numerous small,
greasy plugs (follicular casts) adhering to the skin and hairs of the medial and lateral

I 044 • Keratinization Defects

margins. It is most common in Dachshunds but also occurs in other breeds with pendulous ears (see Fig. 14-6E). Sleeping next to a forced air duct or wood stove seems to
increase the frequency or severity of disease. The small particles can easily be removed
for diagnosis with the thumb nail or a flat instrument. These particles are soft, irregular,
and greasy. With time, the scaling becomes more confluent and can involve the entire ear
margin, and the condition can be accompanied by partial alopecia of the pinna. In chronic
cases, the seborrheic debris on the ear margins, especially at the tips, can become very
thick and hard. With head shaking, scratching, or blunt trauma, the hard crust and its
subjacent viable tissues can crack and result in an ear fissure (see Chap. 19). The fissure is
painful and causes the dog to shake its head, which accelerates the fissuring.
In early cases, the diagnosis of ear margin dermatosis is straightforward. Seborrheic
changes are restricted to the ear margin of a dog with pendulous ears. Pruritus and pain
are absent. With heavy crusting and fissures, all the causes of vasculitis (Fig. 14-9) must
be considered (see Chap. 9). Histopathologic examination shows marked surface and
follicular orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 14-10).
Ear margin dermatosis is an incurable condition that can be controlled with antiseborrheic treatments. Coupled with these treatments, management changes should be considered. Affected dogs should not be allowed to sleep near forced air heating ducts, wood
stoves, or other dry heat sources.P In addition, the dog's diet should be reviewed and
improved if necessary.
Because of the follicular nature of the seborrhea, sulfur-salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide, or benzoyl peroxide-sulfur shampoos are most commonly used to remove the accumulated debris. In chronic cases in which the debris is hard, the areas should be soaked in
warm water for 5 to 10 minutes before the shampoo is applied. The areas are shampooed
every 24 to 48 hours until the debris is completely removed. Severe cases can take 10 to
14 days for this to occur. After the cleaning, a moisturizer should be applied to minimize
transepidermal water loss. When the ears are near normal, the frequency of shampooing
is reduced to an as-needed basis.
In some cases, removal of the debris results in pinnal inflammation. In most instances, however, this inflammation is mild and requires no treatment. Moderately inflamed lesions benefit from the application of a 1% hydrocortisone cream or ointment.I?

FIGURE 14-9. Ear margin scaling and crusting in a Dachshund. Lesions away from
the ear margins suggest an underlying vasculopathy.

Keratinization Defects • I 045

FIGURE 14-10. Histopathologic section of ear margin dermatosis. Tangential section shows
a papillated epidermis with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.

With severe inflammation or early fissures, prednisolone (1 mg/kg q24h orally) or a potent
steroid-antibiotic topical product is needed for 7 to 10 days. With extensive fissuring,
pinnal surgery is required. With multiple fissures, a cosmetic ear crop should be performed. Appropriate diagnostic tests should be performed before surgery to ensure that
the fissure was not caused by some underlying vasculitic process.

• CANINE TAIL GLAND HYPERPLASIA
All dogs have an oval spot on the dorsal surface of the tail, about 2.5 to 5 em distal to the
anus, that is different from other skin. The area has simple instead of compound hair
follicles and numerous large sebaceous and circumanal (perianal or hepatoid) glands (Figs.
14-11 and 14-12).
Some dogs with primary or secondary seborrhea, or with relative or absolute elevated
blood androgen levels develop hyperplasia of the sebaceous glands, circumanal glands in
the tail gland, or both. When the androgen levels are elevated, the circumanal glands
around the anus and elsewhere are also typically hyperplastic. Early tail gland hyperplasia
usually goes unnoticed because the overlying hairs hide the defect. With time, however,
the area becomes hairless because of friction and compression of the hair follicles by the
hyperplastic glands. At this stage, the owner notices an oval, bulging, hairless area on the
tail (see Fig. 14-6F). The overlying skin may be scaly, greasy, hyperpigmented, or some
combination thereof. In advanced cases, the area can have a nodular appearance because
of nonuniform glandular hypertrophy and cystic dilatation or secondary infection.
The area of the tail gland hyperplasia may become infected, although this is uncommon. Grouped or single pustules may develop, with each pustule representing an acnelike sebaceous or circumanal gland infection. Puncturing the pustules, expressing the
contents, and administering systemic antibiotics usually provide relief. In some cases, the
infection may recur.
Tail gland hyperplasia is usually a strictly cosmetic defect requiring no treatment.
Because many cases are caused by hyperandrogenism, castration should be offered to
prevent further enlargement. When castration is performed, a beneficial response usually

1046 • Keratinization Defects

FIGURE 14-1 I. Canine tail gland hyperplasia. Marked
hyperplasia of the circumanal glands. Compression of
the hair follicles disrupts the hair cycle and results in
alopecia.

occurs within 2 months. The owner should be warned that castration may not lead to
complete resolution of the existing lesion. Although the glands should become less hyperplastic, the alopecia may be permanent as a result of prolonged glandular pressure on the
hair follicles. In the past, medical treatment with estrogens or progestational compounds
has been recommended because of their antiandrogenic effects. As a result of their
potential serious side effects, however (e.g., bone marrow suppression, diabetes mellitus),
these agents are no longer suggested.
Animals that do not respond sufficiently to castration or are not neutered may benefit
from surgery. An elliptic piece of skin is removed from the dorsal area of the tail over the
enlargement. Blunt dissection and curettage are then performed to remove the excess
glandular material under and lateral to the incision. Before the wound is sutured, additional loose skin can usually be removed to provide a normal conformation of skin around
the tail. The area should be bandaged to prevent self-damage or suture removal by the
dog. Excellent cosmetic correction usually results, with only a small scar remaining visible.
Without castration, recurrence can be expected in 1 to 3 years .

• FELINE TAIL GLAND HYPERPLASIA
Cats have the same tail gland area as dogs, but it is located in a line along the dorsal
aspect of the tail and is commonly called the supracaudal organ. As in dogs, this area is
rich in sebaceous and epitrichial sweat glands (Fig. 14-13), and a waxy secretion accumulates on the surface.
In some cats, especially those kept in catteries or small enclosures, unusually large

Keratinization Defects • I 047

FIGURE 14-12. Close-up of the circumanal (perianal
or hepatoid) glands in the tail gland.

FIGURE 14-13. Feline stud tail. Marked sebaceous gland hyperplasia.

I 048 • Keratinization Defects

amounts of excess secretions accumulate and cause matting of the hair and the formation
of scales and crusts (Fig. 14-14). In some cases, the overlying haircoat is thinned, and the
skin may become hyperpigmented (see Fig. 14-6G). Rarely, secondary bacterial folliculitis
and furunculosis complicate the condition. This condition is of great concern to owners of
uncastrated male show cats, which accounts for the popular name stud tail'", however, it
has also been observed in females and altered males. Castration does not resolve the
condition but may help stop its progression.r"
Treatment consists of clipping the affected area and washing it with antiseborrheic
shampoos. Benzoyl peroxide shampoo can be very useful. This treatment can be followed
by daily cleaning with alcohol or a milder antiseborrheic shampoo (e.g., sulfur-salicylic
acid). It is advisable to provide affected cats with as little confinement as possible, because
fresh air and sunshine may help prevent recurrence. The unconfined cat usually resumes
cleaning itself and the tail gland area with the customary fastidiousness characteristic of
healthy, well-adjusted cats. Progestational compounds may be helpful; because of their
common side effects, however, their advisability as therapy for a benign, asymptomatic
disease is questionable. Retinoids have not been used in this condition, but they may be
of some value in recalcitrant cases.
If the cat fails to care for the problem, the owner must carefully and frequently comb
and groom the area to prevent recurrence.

FIGURE 14-14. Feline tail gland hyperplasia with accumulation of greasy material in the
hairs.

Keratinization Defects • 1049

• EXFOLIATIVE DERMATOSES
Virtually every surface or superficial follicular skin lesion in dogs and cats exfoliates (falls
off in scales and layers) during its development, maturation, or involution. With the
coalescence of adjacent lesions, large areas of exfoliation can occur, making the list of
possible exfoliative dermatoses large indeed. True exfoliative dermatoses, however, are
characterized by generalized severe desquamation with or without generalized erythema
(erythroderma). Although affected animals may have some unaffected areas on the body,
those that are involved are uniformly affected, with no visible normal skin.
In animals receiving no medications for a systemic or skin disease, the following must
be considered as causes of the exfoliative dermatitis: ichthyosis, contact dermatitis to a
topical agent (shampoo, dip, and so forth), pemphigus foliaceus, feline leukemia virus
(FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) dermatitis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
erythema multiforme or toxic epidermal necrolysis, epitheliotropic lymphoma, the disorders that cause cutaneous flushing, and parapsoriasis. 1, 41, .53, ,59 When an animal is receiving
medications, drug eruption and unexpected physiologic response to the drug must be
added to the list. Corticosteroids from internal (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism) or external
sources increase the number of possibilities. In these animals, widespread superficial
bacterial folliculitis, dermatophytosis, Malassezia dermatitis, demodicosis, cheyletiellosis,
and occasionally scabies must be considered. Idiopathic cases are reported. 1
With careful consideration of the history, physical findings, and routine in-office
diagnostic tests (e.g., skin scrapings, trichography, cytologic tests), the list of differential
diagnoses for an exfoliative dermatosis becomes considerably shorter. Definitive diagnosis
is often made by skin biopsy, Most causes of exfoliative dermatosis are covered elsewhere
in this textbook. Parapsoriasis, cutaneous flushing, thymoma, and physiologic response to a
drug are considered here.

• THYMOMA
A generalized exfoliative dermatitis has been described in a small number of cats with
thymoma.l" 49a, 58 Affected cats were middle-age to old, with an exfoliative dermatitis first
noted on the head and pinna. Pruritus usually is minimal or absent, but may be intense.
Despite treatment with steroids, antibiotics, or other agents, lesions spread and involve the
entire body in a matter of weeks to several months. Hair loss can accompany the
exfoliation (Fig. 14-15), and seborrheic debris accumulates in the interdigital spaces and

FIGURE 14-15. Hair loss and
seborrheic change in a cat with a thymoma, Note how the epithelium exfoliates in large sheets.

1050 • Keratinization Defects

FIGURE 14-16. Hair loss and
seborrheic paronychia in a cat with
a thymoma.

around the clawbeds (Fig. 14-16). Some affected cats lose hair pigment and tum white.
Beyond the skin lesions, the cats appear otherwise healthy.
The differential diagnosis includes systemic lupus erythematosus, FeLV or FIV dermatitis, drug reaction, demodicosis, or hyperadrenocorticism with secondary bacterial,
dermatophyte, or Malassezia involvement. On skin biopsy, a cell-poor hydropic interface
dermatitis of the surface and follicular epithelium is seen (Fig. 14-17). Apoptotic keratinocytes are seen in the basal layer and, to a lesser extent, in the stratum spinosum, In
one case, the infiltrating lymphocytes were CD8+, and sebaceous glands were also infiltrated. 49a
Most thymomas are benign, and surgical removal will result in permanent resolution
of the skin lesions .

• PARAPSORIASIS
In humans, parapsoriasis (resembling psoriasis) is grouped into three major entities, each
of which has several morphologic variants.F To date, only large plaque parapsoriasis has

FIGURE 14-17. Thymoma. A
cell-poor hydropic interface dermatitis.

Keratinization Defects • 1051

FIGURE 14-18. Parapsoriasis.
Superficial perivascular to lichenoid
dermatitis with parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and diffuse exocytosis of
lymphocytes.

been reported in animals and only in one dog and one cat. 53 The dermatoses were
characterized by widespread erythematous, scaly plaques that spared the head, pinnae,
and distal limbs (see Fig. 14-6H). Irregular hair loss occurred in the involved areas. In
the dog, many of the plaques were studded with large, superficial, flaccid, yellow pustules,
annular erosions, and epidermal collarettes that were a result of a secondary staphylococcal infection.
Biopsy of affected skin showed a focally parakeratotic, regularly hyperplastic, superficial perivascular to lichenoid interface dermatitis with diffuse exocytosis of normallymphocytes (Fig. 14-18). A striking finding was a diffuse accumulation of lymphocytes arranged
in a line within the basal cell layer of the epidermis and hair follicle outer root sheaths
(Fig. 14-19).
Both animals were treated with high levels of corticosteroids, the dog with oral
prednisolone (2.2 mglkg q24h) and the cat with methylprednisolone acetate injections (5
mglkg q2wk). Marked healing occurred in 8 to 10 days, with complete resolution of all
lesions in 6 to 10 weeks. Both cases required maintenance therapy to prevent relapse.

FIGURE 14-19. Parapsoriasis.
Diffuse spongiosis and exocytosis of
lymphocytes. Note the row of lymphocytes within the basal layer.

1052 • Keratinization Defects

• CUTANEOUS FLUSHING
Cutaneous flushing is due to vasodilation of the cutaneous blood vessels and is manifested
by the skin turning various shades of red. 22 The flushing can be regionalized or generalized and paroxysmal or persistent. Pathologic flushing is due to the direct action of
vasoactive compounds on the blood vessels. Because some vasoactive compounds (e.g.,
histamine) are pruritogenic, some flushing disorders can be pruritic, but the flushing
precedes the pruritus.
In dogs, persistent, widespread erythema (erythroderma) can be a feature of systemic
lupus erythematosus, demodicosis, drug reaction, thallium toxicosis, mast cell tumor, cutaneous lymphoma, or systemic mastocytosis.v- 64 Paroxysmal flushing has been associated
with pheochromocytoma, drug reaction, mast cell tumor, and the carcinoid syndrome.'!
In humans, the carcinoid syndrome refers to an uncommon condition associated with
slow-growing malignant carcinoid tumors derived from enterochromaffin cells, which produce a variety of vasoactive compounds.P In most instances, the tumor is located in the
gastrointestinal tract, but it can also be found in the ovary, testis, skin, or bronchus. In
dogs, the carcinoid syndrome has been reported in association with pulmonary adenocarcinoma" and has been recognized in several dogs with intestinal Iesions.P
At their onset, flushing disorders in dogs have no associated exfoliation. In chronic
cases, especially when the flushing is persistent, desquamation occurs but remains overshadowed by the erythroderma. All animals with such a presentation should have a
thorough evaluation for an internal malignancy.

• PHYSIOLOGIC RESPONSE TO DRUGS
As mentioned earlier, virtually all surface or superficial follicular skin lesions exfoliate at
some point, especially during their involution. Accordingly, the drugs used to treat the
lesions cause exfoliation in effect. If the skin lesions are widespread and numerous, an
exfoliative dermatosis will result. Because clients are aware of the initial lesions, most
recognize that the exfoliation is a sign of healing and are not concerned by it.
Drugs that influence epidermal turnover (e.g., hormones, cytotoxic agents, retinoic
acids) can cause an exfoliative dermatitis near the onset of treatment or after discontinuation of the drug. Exfoliation at the termination of treatment with a cytostatic agent should
be expected, and the client should be made aware of this expectation. The most common
example is the profound scaling that occurs when an animal is withdrawn from a chronic

FIGURE 14-20. Exfoliative dermatosis in a hypothyroid Doberman pinscher resulting from the
institution of thyroid hormone replacement therapy.

Keratinization Defects • 1053

course of treatment with moderate to high doses of a corticosteroid. Similar changes can
occur in dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism that are being treated with mitotane
(o,p'-DDD) and in hypothyroid dogs within the first few weeks of treatment with thyroid
hormone. Much more problematic is the exfoliation that occurs 1 to 2 weeks after
treatment with a nonsteroidal agent is instituted (Fig. 14-20). The basic quandary is
whether the exfoliation represents a drug eruption or clinical evidence of increased
epidermal turnover. If the pharmacology of the drug allows this change and the animal is
showing no clinical or laboratory evidence of systemic illness, the question can be answered by observing the animal carefully for 7 to 10 days. Pharmacologic exfoliation will
lessen or stop within this time, but a drug eruption will persist or worsen.

• REFERENCES
1. Anderson RK: Exfoliative dermatitis in the dog. Comp
Cont Educ 3:885, 1981.
2. Baker BB, et aI: Epidermal cell renewal in dogs after
clipping the hair. Am J Vet. Res 35:445, 1974.
3. Bedford CJ Young JM: A comparison of comedonal
and skin surface lipids from hairless dogs showing clinical signs of acne. J Invest Dermatol 77:341, 1981.
4. Berardesca E, Borroni G: .Instrumental evaluation of
cutaneous hydration. Clin Dermatol 13:323, 1995.
5. Bond R: Canine and feline acne. Vet Ann 33:230,
1993.
6. Breen P, Jeromin A: Practice tips. Derm Dialogue,
Winter 93/94, p 7.
7. Campbell A: Calcipotriol poisoning in dogs. Vet Rec
141:27, 1997.
8. Campbell KL, Davis CA: Effects of thyroid hormones
on serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentrations in
dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:752, 1990.
9. Campbell KL, et aI: Effects of oral sunflower oil on
serum and cutaneous fatty acid concentration profiles
in seborrheic dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:29, 1992.
10. Campbell KL, Schaeffer DJ: Effects of four veterinary
shampoos on transepidermal water losses, hydration of
the stratum corneum, skin surface lipid concentrations,
and corneocyte counts in dogs. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
9:96, 1993.
11. Campbell KL, Kirkwood AR: Effect of topical oils on
transepidermal water loss in dogs with seborrhea sicca.
In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993,
p 157.
12. Campbell KL, et aI: Effects of four anti-seborrheic
shampoos on transepidermal water losses, hydration of
the stratum corneum, skin surface lipid concentration,
skin surface pH, and corneocyte counts in dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 10:85, 1994.
13. Campbell KL, et aI: Effects of four topical humectant!
emollient solutions on the skin of dogs. Proc Annu
Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
12:49, 1996.
14. Campbell KL, Bibus 0: Effect of a-linolenic acid on
the skin and plasma phospholipids of beagle puppies.
Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
15:105, 1999.
15. Christophers E, Mrowietz U: Psoriasis. In: Freedberg
1M, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co., San Francisco, 1999, p 495.
16. Curtis C: Use and abuse of topical dennatological

therapy in dogs and cats. Part 1. Shampoo therapy. In
Pract 20:244, 1996.
17. Day MJ: Review of thymic pathology in 30 cats and 36
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:393, 1997.
18. Draelos ZD: New developments in cosmetics and skin
care products. Adv Dermatol 12:3, 1997.
19. Ellis CN, Voorhees JJ: Etretinate therapy. J Am Acad
Dermatol 16:267, 1987.
20. Evans AG, et aI: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
treatment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:2553,
1985.
21. Fadok VA: Treatment of canine idiopathic seborrhea
with isotretinoin. Am J Vet Res 47:1730,1986.
22. Freedberg 1M, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
New York, 1999.
23. Gardey L, et aI: Hydrating effect of a shampoo on the
skin of healthy dogs. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet Dermatol 15:27, 1999.
24. Gordon JG, Kwochka KW: Corneocyte counts for evaluation of antiseborrheic shampoos in dogs. Vet Dermatol 4:57, 1993.
25. Gottlieb SL, et al: Cellular actions of etretinate in
psoriasis: Enhanced epidermal differentiation and reduced cell-mediated inflammation are unexpected outcomes. J Cutan Pathol 23:404, 1996.
26. Griffin CEo Open fomm-Etretinate-How is it being
used in veterinary dermatology? Derm Dialogue,
Spring/Summer 1993, p 4.
27. Gross TL, et aI: Veterinary Dermatopathology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1992.
28. Cuaguere E: Cas clinique: Seborrhee primaire repondant a l'administration de vitamine A. Point Vet 16:
689, 1984.
29. Cuaguere E: Quel est votre diagnostic? Point Vet 18:
245, 1986.
30. Ihrke PJ, Goldschmidt MH: Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:682,
1983.
31. Kietzmann M: Eicosanoid levels in canine inflammatory skin diseases. In: von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW
(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology 1. BailliereTindall, London, 1990, p 211.
32. Kwochka KW, Rademakers AM: Cell proliferation of
epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of Beagles and Cocker spaniels with healthy skin. Am J Vet
Res 50:587, 1989.
33. Kwochka KW: Keratinization abnormalities: Understanding the mechanism of scale formation. In: Ihrke

1054 • Keratinization Defects
PJ, et al (eds). Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Vol. 2. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993, p 91.
34. Kwochka KW: Keratinization disorders. Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1993, P 167.
35. Kwochka KW: Shampoos and moisturizing rinses in
veterinary dermatology. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W. B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1995, p 590.
36. Kwochka KW: The structure and function of epidermal
lipids. Vet Dermatol 4:151, 1993.
37. Kwochka KW: Retinoids and vitamin A therapy. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 203.
38. Kwochka KW: Advances in the management of canine
scaling. Proc 3rd World Cong Vet Dermatol 1996, p.
99.
39. Lu I, et al: Modulation of epidermal differentiation,
tissue inflammation, and T-Iymphocyte infiltration in
psoriatic plaques by topical calcitriol. J Cutan Pathol
23:419, 1996.
40. Marks SL, et al: Clinical evaluation of etretinate for
the treatment of canine solar induced squamous cell
carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions. J Am Acad Dermatol 27:11, 1992.
41. Miller WH Jr: Cutaneous flushing associated with intrathoracic neoplasia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
28:217, 1992.
42. Paradis M: Footpad hyperkeratosis in a family of
Dogues de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol 3:75, 1992.
43, Parker W, et al: Vitamin A-responsive seborrheic dermatitis in the dog: A case report. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 19:546, 1983.
44. Paterson S, et al: Ultrasonographic biomicroscopy to
assess changes in the skin after shampoo therapy. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 3. Butterworth-Heinnemann, Boston,
1999, p 523.
45. Peck GL, Di Giovanna JJ: Retinoids. In: Freedberg
IM, et al (eds): Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hili Book Co., San Francisco, 1999.
46. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: The use of synthetic retinoids in
veterinary medicine. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995, p 585.
47. Prens EP, et al: Effects of cyclosporine on cytokines
and cytokine receptors in psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 33:947, 1995.
48. Reichrath J, et al: Biologic effects of topical calcipotriol
(MC 903) treatment in psoriatic skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 36:19, 1997.
49. Reister M: Ask the vet: Feline acne problem. Cat
Fancy 39:16, 1996.

49a. Rivierre C, Olivry T: Dermatite exfoliative paraneeplasique associee it un thymome chez un chat: Resolution des symptomes apres thymectomie. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 34:531, 1999.
50. Rosenkrantz WS: The pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
management of feline acne. Vet Med 86:504, 1991.
51. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
52. Scott DW: Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in the
Cocker spaniel. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:125, 1986.
53. Scott DW: Exfoliative dermatoses in a dog and a cat
resembling large plaque parapsoriasis in humans.
Comp Anim Pract 2:22, 1986.
54. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the efficacy of two
commercial veterinary emollients (Micropearls and
Humilac) in the management of wintertime dry skin in
dogs. Cornell Vet 81:419, 1991.
,55. Scott DW, et al: A clinical study on the effect of two
commercial veterinary benzoyl peroxide shampoos in
dogs. Canine Pract 19:7, 1994.
56. Scott DW: Clinical assessment of topical benzoyl peroxide in treatment of canine skin diseases. Vet Med
74:808, 1979.
57. Scott DW: Topical cutaneous medicine, or "Now what
should 1 try?" Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46:89, 1979.
58. Scott DW, et al: Exfoliative dermatitis in association
with thymoma in three cats. Feline Pract 23:8, 1995.
59. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 5th ed. W. B. Saunders, Co., Philadelphia,
1995.
60. Simpson JW, van den Brock AHM: Fat absorption in
dogs with diabetes mellitus or hypothyroidism. Res Vet
Sci 50:346, 1991.
61. Stewart LJ, et aI: Isotretinoin in the treatment of sebaceous adenitis in two vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
27:65, 1991.
62. Suter MM, et al: Keratinocyte biology and pathology.
Vet Dermatol 8:67, 1997.
63. von Tscharner C, et al: Proliferation characteristics of
canine keratinocyte cultures infected with Malassezia
pachydermatis. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet DermatoI15:107, 1999.
64. White SD: The skin as a sensor of internal medical
disorders. In: Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine, 3rd eel. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 5.
65. White SD, et al: Isotretinoin and etretinate in the
treatment of benign and malignant cutaneous neoplasia
and in sebaceous adenitis of longhaired dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 7:101, 1991.
66. White SD, et al: Feline acne and results of treatment
with mupirocin in an open clinical trial: 25 cases
(1994-1996). Vet Dermatol 8:157, 1997.

Chapter

15
Psychogenic Skin Diseases

P

sychodermatology, also known as psychocutaneous medicine and dermatopsychosomatics, is a growing field of interest in human medicine." 24 Workers in this field
believe that the body (soma) and mind (psyche) have been treated separately for too long
and that they constitute a single unit. It is believed that the role of emotional factors in
diseases of the skin is of such significance that if emotional factors are ignored, effective
management of at least 40% of the patients who come to departments of dermatology is
impossible. One exploratory model for these mind-body relationships is the neuro-immuno-cutaneous-endocrine (NICE) network, in which these four organ systems are intimately linked and share a language of neuropeptides, cytokines, glucocorticoids, and other
effector molecules.l" Research in laboratory animals and humans indicates that the central
nervous system (CNS), through the effects of neurohormones, can Significantly modulate
immune responses and pruritus. The relationship between the hypothalamus and the
immune system seems to involve neurohormones secreted by the hypothalamus (thyrotropin releasing factor, prolactin releasing factor, gonadotropin releasing hormone); the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, y-aminobutyric acid;
and the polypeptide neuroregulators somatostatin, vasoactive intestinal peptide, substance
P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptide, a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, neurotensin, neurokinin A, neuropeptide y, enkephalins, and
endorphins.I" 24 These factors are known to have vasomotor, immunomodulatory, chemotactic, and cellular growth effects."
The role of neurotransmitters and neuroregulators in veterinary dermatology is unknown. The field of behavior is rapidly expanding in veterinary medicine, and the use of
behavioral pharmacotherapy is rapidly growing. 22 , 41, 42 Many of the drugs in use act on the
monoamine neurotransmitters, which include dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine,
Recent studies with drugs that block serotonin reuptake, norepinephrine reuptake, or
endorphin actions suggest that they play some role, Part of the effect may be related to
the decrease in the effects of endorphin-induced histamine release.
Studies in laboratory animals have shown that the CNS can interact with the immune
system. Guinea pigs sensitized to bovine serum albumin were conditioned by repeatedly
being exposed to the allergen and an odor simultaneously." They eventually experienced
the allergic reaction when exposed to the odor alone, without the allergen.
In humans, psychodermatologic conditions are divided into psychophysiologic
disorders in which there is a bona fide skin disorder (allergy, urticaria) that can be
exacerbated by emotional stress; primary psychiatric disorders in which there is anxiety,
depression, delusion, and obsessive-compulsive behavior; and secondary psychiatric disorders." 14
Most lesions of psychogenic dermatoses in animals are the result of self-induced damage.
There is good clinical evidence that psychological disturbances are the cause." 8, 22, 31, 47
Obsessive-compulsive disorders are characterized by repetitive, stereotypic, ritualistic behaviors in excess of what is required for normal function; the execution of these behaviors
interferes with normal daily activities and functioning.'- 8, 22, 31 Behavioral conditions that
can be present in obsessive-compulsive animals include boredom, attention-seeking, hyperactivity, and anxiety. Three general factors are involved in the etiopathogenesis:
1055

1056 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases
1. Breed predisposition. Breeds that are emotional and nervous develop more psycho-

genic dermatoses. Oriental breeds of cats (Abyssinian, Siamese, Burmese, and
Oriental) are especially at risk.": 37 Among dogs, the predisposed breeds include
Doberman pinschers, Great Danes, Irish setters, Labrador retrievers, and German
shepherds.t! 38, 48
2. The lifestyle of the animal can be causative or contributory, When individuals not
of predisposed breeds are forced into stressful, isolated, or boring situations and
are without human or canine companionship, they may develop psychogenic dermatoses. Long confinement in crates, continual chain restraint, small-pen housing,
or domination by a forceful or inconsiderate owner may precipitate problems. A
rival animal in the same house or an aggressive neighborhood animal can trigger a
psychogenic disturbance.
3. The individual animal, regardless of breed or lifestyle, can be particularly nervous,
hyperesthetic, fearful, or shy.
The diagnosis of a psychogenic dermatosis is by exclusion and generally cannot be
well documented. The diagnosis is also occasionally used for those frustrating cases that
do not respond to treatment, even when a thorough work-up has not been performed.
Physical causes must always be eliminated before a diagnosis of psychogenic dermatosis is
made. This includes ruling out such causative factors as trauma, neuropathy, local pain,
parasites, allergy, bacterial or fungal infections, and internal diseases. The problem of
accurate diagnosis can be compounded by the fact that psychogenic factors may play a
partial role in a disease; a work-up may reveal an organic disease, but the psychological
component may be significant enough that such treatment becomes necessary for adequate control of the whole condition.
Dermatoses thought to be psychogenic in origin or to have a significant psychogenic
component include acral lick dermatitis (lick granuloma), tail dock neuroma, feline psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis, and miscellaneous psychogenic manifestations such as tail
sucking (feline), tail biting (canine), flank sucking, foot licking, self-nursing, and anal licking.

• PSYCHOLOGICAL DRUG THERAPY
A variety of drugs that affect CNS neurotransmitters or endorphins or that have other
sedative, antidepressant, or antianxiety effects may be beneficial in diseases characterized
by self-destructive behavior, abnormal licking or chewing, and pruritus." In general, these
drugs are tried when the disease is believed to have a significant psychological component
in its cause. These drugs, which work by a variety of mechanisms, include antidepressants,
antipsychotics, opiate antagonists, anxiolytics, and mood stabilizers.
The drugs that have been evaluated the most are the heterocyclic (tricyclic) antidepressants (amitriptyline, clomipramine, doxepin) and fluoxetine, another antidepressant
that is structurally different from the heterocyclic antidepressants but that has a similar
mechanism of action. t These drugs act primarily by increasing neurotransmitter levels of
serotonin. They work primarily by blocking the reuptake of serotonin by the presynaptic
neuronal membrane, which effectively increases the activity of serotonin. Doxepin, clomipramine, and amitriptyline also increase the effect of norepinephrine, which is responsible
for arousal and stimulating the behavioral focus.'? Clomipramine and fluoxetine are more
potent at increasing the synaptic levels of serotonin. Amitriptyline and doxepin are potent
HI blockers, and this may be helpful in some cases as well. These other effects may help
to make these drugs useful in allergic diseases as well, especially when a psychogenic
component to the pruritus is present. Amitriptyline hydrochloride at 1 mg/kg every 12
hours was effective in 16% of the allergic dogs treated.!? whereas doxepin hydrochloride
"7, 10, 13, 22, 31, 41, 42: see References.
uo, 11, 17,20,22,31,33,35,40,41: see References,

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1057

at 1 mglkg every 8 hours was ineffective.s" However, one author (CEG) has seen excellent
responses to doxepin in some animals. Anecdotal reports indicate that the serotonin
reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine hydrochloride at 1 mglkg q24h is effective in 30% of dogs
with allergic pruritus.s"- 40 All these drugs at the following dosages have been reported
effective for a variety of psychogenic dermatoses in dogs and cats to be described.P
• Fluoxetine (Prozac), 1 mg/kg q24h, can be used. 22, 31, 3,3, 40 The problem is that it is
very expensive.
• Clomipramine (Clomicalm, Anafranil), 2 to 4 mg/kg daily given q24h or divided
q12h for dogs, and 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg daily given q24h for cats." 10, 11, 27, 29, 31, 35
Clomipramine is available as a veterinary drug (Clomicalm), now licensed for use in
dogs with separation anxiety, In dogs, clomipramine has a short elimination half-life
and marked interdog variability.l! It should be given with food to minimize vomiting.]O Absorption following oral administration is similar when clomipramine is given
with or without meals.P'
• Amitriptyline (Elavil), 1 to 3 mg/kg q12h,13, 17,22 although less expensive, may not be
as effective as clomipramine or fluoxetine.
• Doxepin (Sinequan, Adapin), 0,5 to 2 mglkg q12h with higher doses used more in
psychogenic dermatoses, also has the advantage of being less expensive,
• Imipramine (Tofranil), 2 to 4 mg/kg q24h.
In general, the potentially more serious side effects of these drugs are induction of
cardiac arrhythmias, such as promotion of heart block by slowing of cardiac conduction,
and anticholinergic effects including dry mouth, urine retention, and reduced tear production.": 17, 41 They also lower the seizure threshold, and they enhance monamine oxidase
inhibitor toxicity in addition to having the metabolic results and side effects that are
inherent to first-generation antihistamines. Up to 30% of animals treated may show
varying combinations and variably severe degrees of vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, hyperexcitability, polydipsia, increased frequency of urination and/or defecation, urinary retention,
aggression, personality changes, and anorexia. 10, 29, 30, 31, 40
Endorphins may also play a role in perpetuating or inducing pruritic behavior such as
excessive grooming. The opiate antagonists bind competitively to opiate receptors in the
CNS and block the binding of endogenous endorphins that may be produced or released
from self-destructive behavior.22, 30 This prevents or inhibits the euphoric state that the
endorphins would induce, helping to alleviate the desire to be self-destructive, Feline
psychogeniC alopecia and canine acral lick dermatitis are two syndromes characterized by
excessive self-licking. Studies using endorphin blockers demonstrated some efficacy. In
cats with feline psychogenic alopecia, naloxone (Narcan) injected subcutaneously (1 mglkg)
resulted in improvement in four of five treated cats. 50 Another study in dogs with acral
lick dermatitis showed that the endorphin blocker naltrexone (Trexan) (2.2 mg/kg q24h)
was helpful in 70% of the cases treated.'? Adverse reactions are considered quite uncommon, although there is a report of a dog with naltrexone-induced pruritus.P" Naltrexone
(Nemexin) administered orally successfully suppressed pruritus in various internal and
dermatologic diseases in humans, wherein traditional therapeutic modalities had failed. 16a

Anxiolytic oral drugs (especially benzodiazepines and antihistamines) that may be
helpful are phenobarbital, 2.2 to 6.6 mg/kg q12h; diazepam (Valium), 0.2 mglkg q12h in
cats; 0.25 to 1.1 mg/kg q12h in dogs; hydroxyzine (Atarax), 2.2 mg/kg q8h; buspirone
(BuSpar) 2.5 to 10 mg q8 to 12h for dogs; 2.5 to 7..5 mg q8-12h for cats. 22, 42 The
mechanism of action of this class of drugs is not well known. Possible mechanisms include
increased oy-aminobutyric acid activity and antagonism of serotonin activity, Buspirone
blocks serotonin presynaptic and postsynaptic receptors and has dopamine agonist activity.7, 42 Adverse effects include mild sedation, appetite stimulation, personality changes,
and paradoxical excitation. In cats, diazepam causes an idiosyncratic hepatotoxicosis that is
often fatal." This drug must be discontinued if cats become unduly sedated, lethargic, or
anorectic or begin vomiting. Baseline screening serum biochemistry is recommended prior
to initiating therapy and after 3 to 5 days of treatment. Special attention is paid to serum
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST).

1058 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

• CANINE PSYCHOGENIC DERMATOSES

Acral Lick Dermatitis
Acral lick dermatitis, also known as lick granuloma, results from an urge to lick the lower
cranial portion of a leg, producing a thickened, firm, oval plaque. The condition may be
organic or psychogenic in origin. 38 , 43, 48 In the past, many authors thought that most cases
that presented with lesions and a history compatible with acral lick dermatitis were of
psychogenic origin; today, however, it is believed that organic disease is commonly present
(see Chap. 4, Acral Lick Furunculosis). Potential organic causes should always be excluded. At the very minimum, bacterial or fungal disease, demodicosis, previous trauma,
allergy (inhalant, food, flea), and underlying joint disease should be ruled out before
diagnosing a case as purely psychogenic in origin. If readily available, electromyography
(EMG) may be a valuable tool to identity cases with abnormal paraspinal muscle activity
suggesting a neurological origin. 43

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Boredom or separation anxiety may cause a dog to develop the habit of licking its leg. A
careful history may reveal that the dog is alone much of the day. The classic patient is a
large, active dog whose owners work and have no children at home. Either there is no
companion dog or another dog in the household provides no play activity. Unusual
restrictions on the dog's freedom can be a causative factor. Dogs kept in crates for long
periods or dogs that are chained can become bored and relieve their frustrations by
constantly licking a leg. In other dogs, a preexisting focal dermatosis (e.g., an infection,
neoplasm, or wound) precipitates a vicious circle. The constant licking produces an eroded
area on the skin that itches exquisitely. An itch-lick cycle is established until a firm,
ulcerated lesion results. Possibly, a wound may initiate the licking, or the licking may
occur in response to stress or boredom. The licking of the erosion or wound leads to
ulceration and to the exposure of deeper skin layers. The licking prevents the ulcer from
healing and predisposes the animal to secondary infection. Epidermal hyperplasia and
dermal fibrosis account for the nodular plaque that is characteristic of the disease. The
lesion at this stage used to be called a granuloma or tumor, but it is neither neoplastic nor
granulomatous.
Excessive licking may cause the production and release of endorphins, making the
animal feel better (euphoric) and at the same time producing an analgesic effect that
decreases the animal's pain perception. This process essentially addicts the dog to the
compulsive licking.
Electrophysiologic studies have suggested that a mild distal sensory axonal polyneuropathy may be present in some cases of acral lick dermatitis," although these abnormalities may be a result and not the cause of the disease. EMG studies of paraspinal muscles
demonstrated abnormal spontaneous activity in 56% of the cases, suggesting a possible
lesion in ventral motor nerve roots, which is not likely to be a result of the licking in a
peripheral area.P No cases of primary sensory neuropathy were demonstrated in this
study.
On the basis of the phenomenology of the condition and the pharmacologic response,
it has been proposed that canine acral lick dermatitis is an animal model of obsessivecompulsive disorder. 19, 22, .31

CLINICAL FEATURES
Predisposed breeds include the Doberman pinscher, Great Dane, Labrador retriever, Irish
setter, golden retriever, and German shepherd.P- 31, 38, 48 Other breeds, including smaller
dogs, can also develop acral lick dermatitis. It can occur at any age, although most dogs
are older than 5 years of age when presented for treatment. Males with the disorder
outnumber females two to one.

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1059
In almost all cases, the lesion is single and unilateral (Fig. 15-1A). In some cases,
multiple legs may be affected, and these cases may respond poorly to treatment because
there is often an organic disease, such as staphylococcal furunculosis, or an allergy that
must be addressed. One clue that there may be a psychogenic component to the condition is the development of a newly licked area when the original lesion has been covered
by a bandage or wrap. The most common site for a lesion is the cranial carpal or
metacarpal area (see Fig. IS-IE and C). The next most frequent sites are the cranial
radial, metatarsal, and tibial regions. Chronic lesions become hard, thickened plaques or
nodules that have an ulcerated surface and a hyperpigmented halo (see Fig. IS-IV).
Extremely large lesions on the joints that have been present for years may be associated
with arthritis or ankylosis of the underlying joint.

DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis can usually be made from the clinical examination and history. A
definitive diagnosis requires ruling out the other differential diagnoses, which include
neoplasia, pressure point granulomas, calcinosis circumscripta, bacterial furunculosis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, mycotic or mycobacterial granulomas, and underlying hypersensitivity disorders. Histiocytomas and mastocytomas may be mistaken for acral lick
dermatitis if they occur on the cranial surface of the leg. Fungal cultures confirm the
diagnosis of lesions induced by mycoses; exfoliative cytological findings and biopsy samples
provide the basis for diagnosis. However, hypoallergenic diets and intradermal tests are
often indicated to detect a causative or concurrent allergic disease.
Histopathologically, the lesions usually show features that are characteristic of the
disorder but are not diagnostic by themselves." An ulcerated surface is bordered by
irregular epidermal hyperplasia, which may be papillated and is usually marked (Fig. 152). A mild perivascular accumulation of neutrophils and mononuclear cells is usually
present. The dermis shows varying degrees of fibroplasia, and dermal papillae often show
vertical streaking of fibroblasts and collagen fibrils (Fig. 15-3). Common findings include
moderate-to-marked numbers of plasma cells around the epitrichial sweat glands (Fig. 154) and inferior segments of hair follicles and sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Folliculitis or
furunculosis may coexist.
Radiographs usually reveal a secondary periosteal reaction of bones that underlie
large, chronic, acral lick dermatitis lesions." JOint disease is not induced by the licking; if
present, joint disease may be the cause of the excessive licking.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Psychological counseling with the client should be the first step in the management of
acral lick dermatitis of psychogenic origin. The client needs to understand that the dog's
problem is in its head and not just on the leg. Together, the clinician and client must
become psychological detectives to find what caused the dog to lick its leg. Examples of
causes include the following:
1. The dog is left alone all day.
2. The dog is confined for long periods to a crate, kennel, cage, or run.
3. There is a new pet in the horne.
4. There is a new baby in the home.
5. A female dog is in heat nearby but not accessible to the male dog.
6. A new dog has come to the neighborhood.
7. A death has occurred in the family.
8. A long-time companion of the dog has died.
9. Children or other family members have moved away.

The first step in treatment is to recognize the cause and eliminate it, if possible.
Sometimes a change in the dog's lifestyle is the answer. Each situation differs, but the
following are examples of successful corrective measures:

1060 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 15-1. A, Acral lick dermatitis. The carpal area is commonly affected. B, Bilateral acral lick dermatitis
in a Great Dane. C, Metatarsal acral lick dermatitis demonstrating characteristic location and appearance. D,
Close-up of A shows the thickened nodule with the characteristic ulcerated epidermis surrounded by a hyperpigmented halo. E, Flank sucking. Focal area of alopecia, lichenification, and hyperpigmentation in the flank of a

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1061

FIGURE 15-2. Canine acral lick
dermatitis. Fibrosing dermatitis with
marked epidermal and sebaceous
gland hyperplasia, and surface ulceration.

1. More walks and human companionship are very helpful. Some owners can take
their dog to work if they own a small shop or business.
2. For a kennel dog, avoidance of confinement to cages, kennels, or runs can be
beneficial. The owner can make a house pet of the afflicted dog. Even nightly
confinement to a cage may cause enough frustration to trigger acral lick dermatitis.
3. A new puppy as a companion can act as a diversion that may discourage further
licking. The success of this method depends on the extent to which a friendship
develops between the two dogs. For a male dog, a spayed female is very suitable.
The owner should be aware, however, that obtaining a companion dog is not a
guaranteed cure.
4. Freedom to leave the house and premises can enable the dog to develop a life of
its own in the neighborhood. This suggestion is suitable for some rural areas but is
usually impossible in suburban or urban areas where leash laws are in effect.

Once the lesion is present, therapy for the psychological component alone may not be
effective. Systemic, topical, and surgical treatment may be required along with psychotherapy. One or more of the following approaches may be useful. 20-22
• Psychological Drug Therapy. The psychological drugs may be needed for only a
short while, until the habit is broken by behavior modification or the underlying boredom
or stress is eliminated. In other cases, long-term treatment may be required. Antidepressants are the most effective. Doxepin and amitriptyline are less expensive and can be used
when long-term treatment is required. In some cases, a more expensive drug such as
fluoxetine or clomipramine may be needed initially, but maintenance with a less expensive
drug may be possible. For difficult cases, fluoxetine and clomipramine have been the most
effective treatments. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled study, clomipramine was effective for the treatment of canine acral lick dermatitis.'? However, stressors were not
removed, and all dogs relapsed when clomipramine therapy was stopped. Others have also
had success with clomipramine.F
Anxiolytic oral drugs (especially benzodiazepines and antihistamines) that may be
helpful but less effective than the antidepressants are phenobarbital and diazepam. Hy-

FIGURE 15- I. Continued Doberman pinscher. F, Salivary staining of the paws associated with Malassezia pododermatitis in an atopic dog. G, Typical pattern in feline psychogenic alopecia with self-inflicted alopecia of the abdomen, groin, and
inguinal regions. Note the alopecia on the medial forelegs and the mammary enlargement in this cat that were caused by
megestrol acetate. H, Erosive plaque of dermatitis in a cat from self-licking. Alopecia is also present.

1062 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 15-3. Canine acral lick dermatitis. Vertical
streaking of collagen fibrils between rete ridges.

FIGURE 15-4. Canine acral lick dermatitis. Periepitrichial sweat gland accumulation of
plasma cells.

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1063

droxyzine (Atarax), 2.2 mg/kg q8h, is a piperazine-derivative antihistamine with other
effects that has been helpful in some cases, especially those associated with allergy.
Endorphin blockers may also be effective. Naltrexone (Trexan) has been used in dogs
with severe chronic acral lick dermatitis." 49 Dogs were treated with 2.2 mglkg orally every
24 hours. Of 10 dogs, 7 responded well, but 4 dogs relapsed when the drug was
discontinued. Long-term control may be accomplished with reduced doses or longer
intervals between doses. No significant side-effects have been seen. The drug is very
expensive.
Endorphin substitution by the administration of an exogenous source of opiate may
decrease dogs' desire to stimulate the release of endorphins. Hydrocodone (Hycodan) at
0.25 mglkg q8h improved 3 dogs within 3 weeks.' Two were 100% better after 16 weeks
of treatment.
Progestagens have a calming effect, especially on male dogs. An injection of repositol
progesterone (Depo-Provera, 20 mglkg every 3 weeks) has been successful in selected
cases." Megestrol acetate (Megace, Ovaban) has been used orally at 1 mglkg q24h, then
tapered to minimal maintenance doses and frequencies. These agents have to be continued for several months and should not be used in intact female dogs.
• Treating the Lesion. At the same time as the psychological treatment, the skin
lesion should be treated until it is healed; treatment of the lesion alone yields disappointing results. Attempts at preventing licking mechanically by the use of Elizabethan collars,
buckets, muzzles, bandages, casts, and wire-cloth devices may be helpful in allowing initial
healing but are usually unsuccessful alone. Repellent liquids and creams have shown only
limited success and usually only with early and mild lesions.
• Topical Applications. Topical corticosteroids may be helpful, but their use is limited
to the mild early lesion. One commercially available product, Synotic, contains
fluocinolone acetonide 0.01% in 60% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). This product is
applied twice a day. Dissolved in DMSO, corticosteroids can penetrate the lesion.
One homemade formula uses equal parts of 90% DMSO solution and a solution of
1% hydrocortisone acetate and 2% Burrow's solution in propylene glycol (Hydro B1020, Hydro-Plus). This solution is applied to the lesion twice a day for several
weeks. Rubber gloves should be worn by the dog's owner when handling this and
all other products containing DMSO. A combination of fluocinolone in DMSO
(Synotic) and flunixin meglumine (Banamine) has been reported to be effective in
many cases." Three milliliters of flunixine meglumine are added to an 8-ml vial of
Synotic. This solution is applied twice a day until the lesion has healed. The
treatment time varies from 3 to 8 weeks. The analgesic capsaicin (HEET) mixed
with bitter apple (isopropyl alcohol, water, bitter extract)-one part HEET (capsaicin 0.25%, methyl salicylate 15%, camphor 3.6%, acetone, alcohol) to two parts
bitter apple-has also been reported to be effective in early lesions." This solution
is applied initially two to three times per day, then tapered as needed.
• Intralesional Injections. Triamcinolone acetonide (Vetalog) or methylprednisolone
acetate (Depo-Medrol) injections have also been recommended. These agents are
helpful in lesions smaller than 3 em in diameter. They are useless in large chronic
lesions.
• Surgical Removal. In some cases, surgical excision of the entire lesion is the treatment of choice. This is easily and quickly accomplished if the lesion is small enough
to allow surgical repair without undue skin tension. The clinician should always
close the incision with mattress sutures and use bandages or protective devices to
prevent removal of the sutures or self-inflicted trauma by the dog before healing is
complete, which requires at least 2 to 3 weeks. If the animal traumatizes the
surgical site before complete healing has occurred, the resulting wound will be very
difficult to manage. Systemic antibiotics should always be prescribed postoperatively.
In extreme cases, excision of the lesion and replacement with a full-thickness skin
graft can be performed.

I 064 0 Psychogenic Skin Diseases

Laser Therapy. Some cases may respond to laser therapy, which has the advantages
of sterilizing the lesion as the tissue is vaporized and less postoperative pain.
o Radiation Therapy. The occasional effectiveness of radiation therapy has, in general,
been shown to correlate with the duration and size of the lesion. 16, 23, 32 Large
chronic lesions are much less likely to respond favorably. Only 35% of the cases
have sustained excellent responses to radiation therapy."
o Cryosurgery. Cryosurgery may be used as a last resort for lesions that are so large
they cannot be removed surgically, cannot be grafted with a full-thickness skin flap,
and have not responded to other treatment. When properly performed, the hardened mass of tissue is frozen and sloughs over several weeks. New healthy skin
begins to grow from the wound margins. Freezing destroys nerve endings, thereby
blocking the itch-lick cycle. The procedure must usually be repeated two or three
times. It should be attempted only by those familiar with cryosurgical techniques.
o Acupuncture. Acupuncture has been reported to be effective, but its usefulness
must be documented further."
o Electroshock. Good responses were reported in a few dogs with the use of remote
punishment, using precisely controlled momentary shock from an electronic training
collar.'

o

In summary, a guarded prognosis should be given to the client before beginning any
treatment. Acral lick dermatitis is one of the most obstinate skin disorders, but at least it
is not life-threatening.

Miscellaneous Psychogenic Manifestations
There is a group of six psychogenic manifestations (obsessive-compulsive disorders) that
involves sucking or licking a specifically selected anatomic area. 22 , 47 The animal concentrates on one area to which it habitually returns. The treatment regimens that can be tried
are those discussed for canine acral lick dermatitis and feline psychogenic alopecia and
dermatitis.

TAIL BITING
Tail biting is seen mostly in young, long-tailed, long-haired dogs. These dogs chase their
tail and then bite the tip (Fig. 15-5). Many of the afflicted dogs stop this habit when they

FIGURE 15-5. Tail biting in a
dog. Notice the alopecia and excoriation on the tip of the tail.

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1065

FIGURE 15-6. Excessive tail
grooming in a cat with a sacral vertebral anomaly.

get older. These tail-chasers must be differentiated from the dog and occasional cat (Fig.
15-6) that traumatizes the tail tip when it becomes infected and pruritic or when the
tail's normal sensations are altered by lumbosacral stenosis, cauda equina syndrome, or tail
dock neuroma.

TAIL DOCK NEUROMA
This is a rare disorder that follows some tail dockings." Cocker spaniels may be predisposed. The nerves attempt to regrow in a haphazard fashion, and a neuroma develops.
This is palpable as a firm, deep nodule that usually adheres to the skin in the scarred tail
tip. Histologically, the nodule is characterized by fibrous tissue with thick collagen bundles
and multiple small nerve bundles randomly located throughout the nodule (see Chap. 20).
This neuroma appears to stimulate pain or some sensation that causes the dog to lick or
chew at its tail. Surgical removal of the neuroma is the treatment of choice.

FLANK SUCKING
Flank sucking in dogs is similar, in most respects, to tail sucking in cats, but it is more
common and is especially prevalent in Doberman pinschers (see Fig. IS-IE). At one
time, trichuriasis was thought to be a cause of the disorder, but this has not been
documented. In fact, treatment for whipworrns or surgical removal of the cecum (typhlectomy) was rarely successful. It has been suggested that tail biters and flank suckers may
have a form of psychomotor epilepsy. This condition should be differentiated from localized folliculitis, which is pruritic. Folliculitis is usually associated with inflammation and
alopecia, and it may demonstrate hyperpigmentation and lichenification. These conditions
respond to antibiotics. Atopy and food hypersensitivity should also be ruled out. Biopsies
should be performed before a diagnosis of psychogenic flank sucking is made because the
presence of dermatopathological abnormalities suggests that an underlying organic disease
is present. Therapy with phenobarbital or primidone may be helpful. One investigator has
suggested a single intramuscular injection of medroxyprogesterone acetate (20 mglkg) as
possible therapy."

SELF-NURSING
This is largely restricted to female dogs and cats but can occasionally be seen in males.
Usually the self-nursing is confined to one nipple, and the animal repeatedly suckles that
nipple. The nipple may become enlarged through inflammation and lichenification. Spay-

1066 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

ing the animal seems to be helpful in correcting this annoying habit. Sedation and
psychological training to break the habit may also be useful.

ANAL LICKING
This habit, which is almost impossible to break, occurs only in dogs, and a breed predilection exists for Poodles. Many dogs, and particularly Poodles, lick the anal area because of
anal sac disease, Malassezia anal sacculitis, and even perianal Malassezia dermatitis. However, if these causes, atopy, and food hypersensitivity are ruled out, the possibility of
psychogenic anal licking becomes much more likely. Removal of the anal sacs is not
curative in this syndrome. Anorectal disease, particularly inflammation of the lower colon
and rectal mucosa, should also be ruled out. Neurotic Poodles that lick the anal area
cause their owners much anguish. When this condition is chronic, the perianal skin
becomes thickened, hyperpigmented, verrucous, and lichenifled (Fig. 15-7). Secondary
bacterial pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis is likely, and some response to antibiotics or
antiyeast medication occurs. The specific therapy is to try to identify and remove the
cause or to administer antianxiety or antidepressant drugs as for acral lick dermatitis.

FOOT LICKING
This condition is usually associated with atopy, other hypersensitivities, or Malassezia
dermatitis (see Fig. 15-1F); foot licking is rarely seen alone. It is a difficult habit to
break, but therapy with heterocyclic antidepressants may be helpful.

• FELINE PSYCHOGENIC DERMATOSES

Psychogenic Alopecia and Dermatitis
Psychogenic alopecia or dermatitis (neurodermatitis) is an alopecia or a chronic skin
inflammation produced by constant licking. When dermatitis is not present, the complaint
may be of excessive grooming. 12, 37 The dermatic form results from more severe grooming.

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The primary abnormality is thought to be excessive grooming that may result from an
anxiety neurosis. The anxiety may be caused by psychological factors such as displacement
phenomena (e.g., a new pet or baby in the household, a move to new surroundings,
boarding, hospitalization, loss of a favorite bed or companion, or competition for a social
hierarchy position with other pets in the household or in response to other cats entering
the affected eat's territory). There is a breed predilection for the more emotional breeds,
such as Siamese and Abyssinian, although all the Oriental breeds may be prediposed.Pv:"
Feline psychogenic alopecia has been proposed as an animal model of obsessive-compulsive disorder." 22. 35
Feline psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis may be expressed in many ways. Some
cats lick vigorously at a particular area until the sharp barbs on the tongue produce
alopecia, abrasion, ulceration, and secondary infection. Other cats lick and chew more
gently or over a more widespread area so that alopecia is the predominant lesion. Some
cats actually chew at their hair or skin, whereas others chew and pull their hair out.
It has been proposed that the stress may induce an elevation in the levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone and melanocyte-stimulating hormone, which then causes increased
endorphin production.P" The endorphins protect the animal from abnormalities associated
with chronic stress. However, their narcotic, addictive-like effect may act to reinforce the
abnormal grooming behavior. Agents with dopaminergic or opioid effects may decrease
excessive grooming. 5 1

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • I 067

FIGURE 15-7. Anal licking in a dog. The perianal area is
erythematous, lichentfied, and hyperpigmented.

CLINICAL FEATURES
There are no age or sex predilections.s" :37 Areas that the cat can lick easily are the most
common sites: medial forelegs, the inside of the thigh, the caudal abdomen, and the
inguinal region (Fig. 15-8; see also Fig. 15-1G). Less commonly, the dorsal lumbar,
sacral, or tail regions may be involved. This pattern should raise one's index of suspicion
about flea bite hypersensitivity. A symmetric alopecia may also involve the caudomedial
thighs and ventrum. The characteristic lesion of the dermatitic form is a bright red,
elongated, oval plaque or red streak (see Fig. 15-1 H). Eosinophilic plaques may result.
Animals with chronic cases develop lichenification and hyperpigmentation. The course is
long and progresses slowly, sometimes remaining static for months. Siamese or Siamesecross cats often lick out the hair in a localized area of the back, the ventral abdomen, or a
leg without causing a skin reaction. Because the temperature-labile enzymes that convert
melanin precursors into melanin are active (high temperatures produce white hair, low
temperatures produce pigmented hair, and the hairless area is cool), the hair becomes
dark (Fig. 15-9). After the next shedding, the hair is usually replaced by normal-colored
hair.

DIAGNOSIS
Lesions of the dermatitic form may be confused with or possibly develop into eosinophilic
plaques. The alopecic forms may be confused with dermatophytosis, demodicosis, atopy,
food or flea bite hypersensitivity, and feline acquired symmetric alopecia. Because cats are
often reclusive groomers, owners may not know that the cat is licking or chewing excessively. Several helpful techniques are available to answer the question, "Does the cat
groom excessively?" Tufts of hair may have been found in the eat's favorite hiding places.
Alternatively, the cat may be vomiting hairballs, or hair may be visible in the feces. With
cats that use litter boxes, the client can inspect the feces over the next several days and

I 068 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

FIGURE 15-8. Feline psychogenic alopecia. Hair has
been removed from the inguinal area by the eat's licking
and biting.

FIGURE 15-9. Constant licking
removed hair from the back, reducing the skin temperature and
causing the hair to grow in dark in
color.

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • 1069

find that they contain hair. Physical examination reveals short stubby hairs that are readily
palpated by rubbing the fingertips against the normal angle of hair growth. Another
method is to roll the skin and view the folded skin perpendicularly to reveal numerous
shorn-off hairs (Fig. 15 -10). Placing an Elizabethan collar on the cat will result in hair
growth in areas that cannot be groomed. This time-consuming procedure is rarely needed
to establish excessive grooming as a cause of the hair loss. A simple laboratory test for
differentiating between self-induced hair loss and spontaneous alopecia is the epilation
and microscopic examination of hairs from the affected areas. In psychogenic alopecia,
hairs do not epilate easily; they appear to be broken off when examined microscopically
(see Fig. 2-28G), and the hairs regrow while the cat is wearing an Elizabethan collar. In
addition, cats that are fur-mowing as a result of a hypersensitivity often respond to an
injection of methylprednisolone acetate, whereas cats with psychogenic disease do not.
Because feline psychogenic alopecia is diagnosed primarily by ruling out other differential diagnoses, an accurate diagnosis involves a complete work-up. Skin scrapings, fungal
cultures, biopsies (which should show normal skin in nondermatitic areas), and a complete
blood cell count constitute the minimal database that should be obtained. If an eosinophilia is present or the biopsy reveals an inflammatory or endocrine appearance, the
diagnosis of psychogenic alopecia is not warranted. Further tests should include hypoallergenic diet trials; trial ectoparasite therapy for Cheyletiella, Otodectes, and the superficial
Derrwdex gatoi mite (see Chap. 6); intradermal allergen testing; and endocrine function
testing. An initial alternative to the endocrine function test may be a 30-day trial with an
Elizabethan collar. Cats that respond to liothyronine supplementation do not regrow their
hair when grooming is prevented."

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Many of the treatments for psychogenic dermatoses have potential side effects, require
frequent administration, and are expensive. Therefore, cats with the alopecic form of the
disease may best be served by no treatment other than attempts at relieving the stressful
situation.
Cats are such territorial creatures that a change in the pecking order of animals in the
territory has tremendous anxiety potential. One needs to look for a new cat that entered
the household or that invaded the eat's territory. Other factors are barking dogs, a new
baby, moving to a new home, or major changes in the present home. If these problems
can be modified or removed, the cat may improve without any therapy or with just a 30day course of antianxiety drugs to break the habit. If potential stressors cannot be
eliminated, the cat may have to be maintained on medication conttnuously"

FIGURE 15-10. "Fur-mowing" in
a cat. By rolling the skin one can see
the short broken hairs still present.

I 070 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases

Topical medications are of little value because the cat immediately licks them off. The
alopecic form may be successfully managed with phenobarbital (2.2 to 6.6 mglkg q12h
orally) or diazepam (total dose of 1 to 2 mg orally q12h to q24h). Some authors have
reported occasional success with 12.5 to 25 mg of primidone administered orally q8h to
q24h. 12 . Treatment with the endorphin blocker naloxone 1 mglkg subcutaneously has been
shown to have some efficacy, with one injection lasting up to several weeks.P' 51 Fluoxetine at 1 mglkg q24h has been reported effective in two cats with behaviorally induced
symmetrical alopecia." 33 In a study of 11 cats with psychogenic alopecia, 5 of 5 responded
to clomipramine at 1.25 to 2.5 mg PO q24h; 2 of 3 responded to amitriptyline at 5 mg
PO ql2h, and 1 of 4 responded to buspirone at 5 mg PO q12h. 35 Others have also had
success with clornipramine.Pv " If a thorough diagnostic work-up was not performed or if
previous treatments proved ineffective, trial therapy with chlorpheniramine 2 mglcat q12h
or systemic glucocorticoids is warranted. A response may be seen in some cases of
psychogenic alopecia; however, allergic dermatitis may also respond. Aggressive flea control may help in cats that are not intradermally test-positive to fleas. Whether this
response to flea control reflects an undetected flea allergy or that the presence of fleas
stresses the cat is unknown. In cases of dermatitis, if cytologic tests reveal intracellular
bacteria, concurrent antibiotic therapy is indicated. Progestational compounds (a total dose
of 2.5 to 5.0 mg megestrol acetate [Ovaban] administered orally every other day, then
weekly, or 100 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate [Depo-Provera] administered subcutaneously as needed) have also been recommended. Again, the side effects of these drugs can
be striking, so one must weigh the gravity of the disease against the possible drug
toxicities.

Tail Sucking
Tail sucking occurs mostly in cats and specifically in Siamese cats. It is easily recognized
by a wetness of the distal 2 to 3 em of the tail (Fig. 15-11). Close examination of the

FIGURE 15-11. Tail sucking in a cat. The tip of the tail is wet and matted.

Psychogenic Skin Diseases • I 071

skin reveals normal skin without inflammation or scaling. Whenever the cat ceases to lick
the tail and the hair dries, the condition can no longer be detected. Drying occurs when
the eat's attention is focused on interesting activities; when bored, the cat resumes licking
its tail. Treatment is not successful until the eat's boredom is relieved, possibly by changes
in its lifestyle.

• REFERENCES
1. Brignac MM: Hydrocodone treatment of acral lick dermatitis. Proc World Congress Vet Dermatol 2:50,
1992.
2. Center SA, et al: Fulminant hepatic failure associated
with oral administration of diazepam in 11 cats. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 209:618, 1996.
3. Dodman NH, et aI: Use of narcotic antagonists to
modify stereotypic self-licking, self-chewing, and
scratching behavior in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:
815, 1988.
4. Eckstein RA, Hart BL: Treatment of canine acral lick
dermatitis by behavior modification using electronic
stimulation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:225, 1996.
5. Goldberger E, Rapoport JL: Canine acral lick dermatitis: Response to the antiobsessional drug clomipramine.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:179, 1991.
6. Gross TL, Carr SH: Amputation neuroma of docked
tails in dogs. Vet Pathol 27:61, 1990.
7. Gupta MA, Gupta AK: Psychodermatology: An update.
JAm Acad DermatoI34:1030, 1996.
8. Hartmann L: Cats as possible obsessive-compulsive
disorder and medication models. Am J Psychiatry 152:
1236, 1995.
9. Helton-Rhodes K: Bitter apple: HEET combination
topical therapy in the dog. Dermatol Spring/Summer
1993, p 5.
10. Hewson CJ, et aI: Efficacy of clomipramine in the
treatment of canine compulsive disorder. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 213:1760, 1998.
11. Hewson CJ, et aI: The pharmacokinetics of clomipramine in dogs: Parameter estimates following a single
oral dose and 28 consecutive daily oral doses of clomipramine. J Vet Pharmacol Ther 21:214, 1998.
12. Holzworth J: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Surgery, vol. I. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
12a. King IN, et aI: Pharmacokinetics of clomipramine in
dogs follOwing single-dose intravenous and oral administration. Am J Vet Res 61:74, 2000.
13. Koblenzer CS: Pharmacology of psychotropic drugs
useful in dermatologic practice. Int J Dermatol 32:162,
1993.
14. Koo JYM, Pham CT: Psychodermatology: Practical
guidelines in pharmacotherapy. Arch Dermatol 128:
381, 1992.
15. Looney AL, Rothstein E: Use of acupuncture to treat
psychodermatosis in the dog. Canine Pract 23:18,
1998.
16. MacDonald JM: Personal communication, 1991.
16a. Metze D, et al: Efficacy and safety of naltrexone, an
oral opiate receptor antagonist, in the treatment of
pruritus in internal and dermatological diseases. J Am
Acad Dermatol 41:533, 1999.
17. Miller WH Jr, et aI: Nonsteroidal management of canine pruritus with amitriptyline. Cornell Vet 82:53,
1992.
18. O'Sullivan RL, et al: The neuro-immuno-cutaneous-

endocrine network: Relationship of mind and skin.
Arch DermatoI134:1431, 1998.
19. Overall KL: Recognition, diagnosis, and management
of obsessive-compulsive disorders: Part 1. Canine Pract
17:40, 1992.
20. Overall KL: Recognition, diagnosis, and management
of obsessive-compulsive disorders: Part 2-a rational
approach. Canine Pract 17:25, 1992.
21. Overall KL: Recognition, diagnosis, and management
of obsessive-compulsive disorders: Part 3-a rational
approach. Canine Pract 17:39, 1992.
22. Overall KL: Clinical Behavioral Medicine for Small
Animals. Mosby, St. Louis, 1997.
23. Owen LN: Canine lick granuloma treated with radiotherapy. J Small Anim Pract 30:454, 1989.
24. Panconesi E: Stress and skin diseases: Psychosomatic
dermatology. Clin Dermatol 2:4, 1984.
25. Paradis M, Bettenay S: Nonsteroidal antipruritic drugs
in small animals. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p 429.
26. Paradis M, et al: Further investigations on the use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the management of canine pruritus. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:
44, 1991.
27. Paterson S: A placebo-controlled study to investigate
clomipramine in the treatment of canine acral lick dermatitis. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Oxford, 1998, p 436.
28. Pemberton PL: Canine and feline behavior control:
Progestin therapy. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VIII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1983, p 62.
29. Pfeiffer E, et aI: Clomipramine-induced urinary retention in a cat. Can Vet J 40:265, 1999.
30. Plumb DC: Veterinary Drug Handbook, 3rd ed. Iowa
State University Press, Ames, 1999.
31. Rapoport JL, et aI: Drug treatment of canine acral
lick: An animal model of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatr 49:517, 1992.
32. Rivers B, et aI: Treatment of canine acral lick dermatitis with radiation therapy: 17 cases (1979-1991). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 29:541, 1993.
33. Romatowski J: Two cases of f1uoxetine-responsive behavior disorders in cats. Feline Pract 26:14, 1998.
34. Russell M, et aI: Learned histamine release. Science
225:733, 1984.
35. Sawyer LS, et aI: Psychogenic alopecia in cats: 11 cases
(1993-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:71, 1999.
36. Schwartz S: Naltrexone-induced pruritus in a dog with
tail-chasing behavior. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:278,
1993.
37. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
38. Scott DW, Walton DK: Clinical evaluation of a topical

I 072 • Psychogenic Skin Diseases
treatment for canine acral lick dermatitis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 20:562, 1984.
39. Seksel K, Linderman MJ: Use of clomipramine in the
treatment of anxiety-related and obsessive-compulsive
disorders in cats. Aust Vet J 76:317, 1998.
40. Shoulberg N: The efficacy of f1uoxetine (Prozac) in the
treatment of acral lick and allergic-inhalant dermatitis
in canines. Proc Annu Member Meeting Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dennatol 6:31, 1990.
41. Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral pharmacotherapy: Part l-antipsychotics and antidepressants. Comp
Continuing Education Pract Vet 18:1067, 1996.
42. Simpson BS, Simpson DM: Behavioral pharmacotherapy: Part II-anxiolytics and mood stabilizers. Comp
Continuing Education Pract Vet 18:1203, 1996.
43. Steiss JE, et aI: Letters to the editor- High incidence
of EMG abnormalities in canine acral lick dermatitis.
Vet Dermatol 6:115,1995.
44. Swanepoel N, et aI: Psychogenic alopecia in a cat:
Response to clomipramine. J S Afr Vet Assoc 69:22,
1998.

45. Thoday KL: Aspects of feline symmetric alopecia. In:
von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dennatology I. Bailliere Tindall, London,
1990, p 47.
46. van Nes JJ: Electrophysiological evidence of sensory
nerve dysfunction in 10 dogs with acral lick dermatitis.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:157, 1986.
47. Voith VL: Behavioral disorders. In: Davis LE (ed):
Handbook of Small Animal Therapeutics. Churchill
Livingstone, New York, 1985, p 519.
48. Walton DK: Psychodermatoses. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1986, p 557.
49. White SD: Naltrexone for treatment of acral lick dermatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1075, 1990.
50. Willemse T, et aI: Feline psychogenic alopecia and the
role of the opioid system. In: von Tschamer C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
I. Bailliere Tindall, London, 1990, p 195.
.'51. Willemse T, et al: The effect of haloperidol and naloxone on excessive grooming behavior of cats. Eur Neuropsychophannacol 39:45, 1994.

Chapter

16
Environmental Skin Diseases

• PHOTODERMATITIS
Electromagnetic radiation comprises a continuous spectrum of wavelengths varying from
fractions of angstroms to thousands of meters. The ultraviolet (UV) spectrum is of particular importance in dermatology:" UVC (less than 290 nm) is damaging to cells but does
not typically reach the earth's surface because of the ozone layer. 27 UVB (290 to 320 nm)
is often referred to as the sunburn, or erythema, spectrum and is about 1000 times more
erythemogenic than UVA. UVA (320 to 400 nm) penetrates deeper into the skin than
UVB and is the spectrum associated with photosensitivity reactions.27
Incident ultraviolet light (UVL) is partially reflected, absorbed, and transmitted inward. Absorbed light raises the energy level of light-absorbing molecules (chromophores),
resulting in various biochemical processes that can damage virtually any component of a
cell. This damage can result in cellular hyperproliferation, mutagenesis, alteration of cell
surface markers, and toxicity. Chromophores in the skin include keratin proteins, blood,
hemoglobin, porphyrin, carotene, nucleic acids, melanin, lipoproteins, peptide bonds, and
aromatic amino acids, such as tyrosine, tryptophan, and histidine.f" Natural barriers to
UVL damage include the stratum corneum, melanin, blood, and carotenes. Melanins
absorb UVL and scavenge free radicals produced during the burning but release other
free radicals that can be equally or more damaging."? These barriers can easily be
overcome by prolonged, repeated exposure to sunlight.
Photodermatology is an ever-expanding field in human medicine and includes photodynamic mechanisms and various specific diseases not recognized in veterinary medicine. 37. 67 Phototoxicity and photosensitivity are of primary concern to veterinary cliniclans." Phototoxicity is the classic sunburn reaction and is a dose-related response to light
exposure. Photosensitivity occurs when the skin has increased susceptibility to the damaging effects of UVL because of the production, ingestion, and injection of or contact with a
photodynamic agent. Photosensitivity is most prevalent in farm animals, but cases are
recognized in dogs. 3o,51

• SOLAR DERMATITIS
Solar dermatitis occurs from an actinic reaction on white skin, light skin, or damaged skin
(e.g., depigmented or scarred areas) that is not sufficiently covered by hair. 7, 35, 96 The
condition develops when such skin is exposed to direct or reflected sunshine. The rapidity
of onset and the severity of the reaction depend on various factors related to the animal,
the duration of sun exposure, and the intensity of the sunlight. The sun's rays are most
intense during the summer months from 9 AM to 3 PM but especially from 11 AM to
2 PM. Altitude influences solar intensity. For every 300-m (1000-ft) increase in elevation,
the sun's intensity increases by 4%.37 The dermatitis is purely a phototoxic reaction
(sunburn) and has no apparent relationship to a hypersensitivity state. The pathogenesis of
phototoxicity is incompletely understood, but it involves the epidermis and blood vessels
of the superficial and deeper vascular plexus. Exposure to UVB and UVC results in the
formation of clusters of vacuolated keratinocytes in the superficial epidermis (so-called
1073

1074 • Environmental Skin Diseases

sunburn cells), as well as apoptotic keratinocytes, vascular dilatation and leakage, and
depletion of Langerhans' and mast cells, with an increase in tissue levels of histamine,
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, other vasoactive compounds, inflammatory cytokines, adhesion molecules, and reactive oxygen species." 37. 46. 59. 60 These latter changes could be the
direct result of the UVB or could be mediated by cytokines released by the epidermal
cells.
Oxygen intermediates-superoxide radical (0 2 - ) , hydrogen peroxide (R 202 ) , and hydroxyl radical (RO' )-may be particularly important in the pathogenesis of solar damage. 19a These substances deplete antioxidants, recruit neutrophils, and can destroy and
degrade all components of connective tissue. Natural defenses (antioxidants) include superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, vitamin E, vitamin C, and ubiquinones. A biphasic apoptosis can occur. Some apoptotic keratinocytes are seen within 4
hours of exposure due to UVA's direct damaging effect on the cell membrane. Other
apoptotic cells appear about 24 hours after exposure. This delayed damage is a result of
DNA alteration.F Solar dermatitis in companion animals is divided into canine nasal solar
dermatitis, feline solar dermatitis, and canine solar dermatitis of the trunk and extremities.
The nasal and feline forms are the most common entities and therefore are discussed in
the greatest detail.

Canine Nasal Solar Dermatitis
Canine nasal solar dermatitis is an actinic reaction in poorly pigmented nasal skin of
dogs.8. 35. 53. 83. 96
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS

This is a phototoxic reaction occurring in poorly pigmented skin. Affected dogs may be
born without pigment, or the nose may have undergone spontaneous noninflammatory
depigmentation (see Chap. 13). Australian shepherds appear to be at increased risk.78. 96
Any dog with an active or resolved traumatic or inflammatory condition that causes hair
loss, depigmentation, or scarring of the nasal area is also susceptible to this photodermatitis. The condition is more frequently seen in sunny climates.
CLINICAL FEATURES

The lesions are found principally at the junction of the haired and hairless skin of the
nose (Fig. 16-lA), but any area on the nasal planum or the face can be affected if it is
sparsely haired and lightly pigmented. Initially, the area that was devoid of pigment
becomes erythematous and scaly. If sun exposure continues, perilesional hair loss occurs,
with resultant involvement of the newly exposed skin. Exudation and crusting follow, and
ulceration may be seen, especially if the dog rubs the area. If intense photoprotection is
started early, the area can heal completely. In most cases, these measures are adopted too
late, and the lesion heals by scarring. The healed area is larger than the original lesion,
and the scarred skin is more susceptible to solar and traumatic damage. Progression and
enlargement of the lesions are evident with the passage of each year, but are especially
rapid during periods of prolonged exposure to intense sunlight. This usually occurs during
the summer months, but may be seen during the winter as a result of reflection from
snow. In chronic cases, deep ulcers form and tissues of the nares and nasal tip disappear,
exposing unsightly nasal tissues that bleed easily. Sometimes, vertical fissures occur at the
nasal tip, dorsal to and involving the nares. After they are established, these fissures are
often permanent. Although rare, squamous cell carcinomas can occur.
DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of nasal solar dermatitis can be straightforward or complicated, depending
on the chronicity of the condition. The key features of the diagnosis are the restriction of

FIGURE 16-1. A, Nasal solar dermatitis. Note sharp margin of erythematous, sunburned depigmented area.
Negative direct immunoflourescent test. B, Feline solar dermatitis. Sunburned, erythematous margins of the pinnae
precede the more serious stage of the disease. Note the characteristic curling of the tips. C, Actinic keratoses on
the pinnal margin. D, Actinic keratoses on the nasal area. E, This 14-year-old cat had the disease for several years
until a squamous cell carcinoma developed on both ears. F, Truncal solar dermatitis. Squamous cell carcinoma has
developed on the posterior abdomen of sun-loving brown and white Staffordshire terrier. G, Close-up of the same
dog as in F. H, Contact dermatitis due to a carpet deodorizer.

1076 • Environmental Skin Diseases

lesions to sun-exposed, nonpigmented, sparsely haired skin; the onset of signs after solar
exposure; the absence of skin lesions in the affected area before the current condition
began; and the complete or near-complete resolution of the lesions with removal from
sunlight. In early cases, the affected area is red and scaly, but the architecture should be
normal and adjacent areas of black skin should be perfectly normal. If all of the abovementioned factors are true, the diagnosis of solar dermatitis is warranted.
Because of the scarring nature of solar dermatitis, the diagnosis of chronic cases is
more problematic. These cases start with abnormal skin from previously unrecognized or
unreported episodes and do not heal completely with strict photoisolation. The basic
quandary here is whether the dog has chronic solar dermatitis or some other nasal skin
disease with a secondary photodermatitis. If the animal has identical lesions in areas that
are not exposed to sun or lesions that are heavily pigmented, the latter case is true.
However, many dogs with underlying disease have lesions restricted to the face.
The list of facial dermatoses (those that start on, remain confined to, or have their
most pronounced lesions on the face) is extensive. The ones germane to this discussion
are discoid lupus erythematosus, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis and epidermolysis bullosa, pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus, drug reaction, and
infectious folliculitis and furunculosis due to bacterial, dermatophyte, Derrwdex, yeast, or
leishmanial infection. Except for discoid lupus erythematosus (see Chap. 9), which tends
to start on and remain restricted to the perinasal area, these diseases tend to start in the
haired skin on the bridge of the nose and work toward the nasal planum. They also tend
to involve the pinnae and the mucocutaneous junctions and have no predilection for
nonpigmented skin. When the nasal planum is extensively ulcerated, fissured, and friable,
vasculitis, neoplasia (especially basal cell tumors, squamous cell carcinomas, fibrosarcomas,
and lymphomas), and granulomatous diseases (especially sterile pyogranuloma syndrome)
must be considered.
The diagnosis of solar dermatitis is confirmed by biopsy, The early depigmented areas
of the nose show fewer melanocytes and less melanin pigment than are seen in normal
skin. After exposure to solar radiation, epidermal hyperplasia with intraepidermal edema is
observed. Vacuolated (sunburn cells) and apoptotic keratinocytes may be seen.s? Perivascular accumulations of inflammatory cells are seen in the upper dermis, and vascular
dilatation is noted in the lower dermis. Solar elastosis (basophilic degeneration of elastin)
usually is not seen (Fig. 16_2);35.35 and requires special stains (e.g., periodic acid-Schiff
IPAS] stain) for best visualization. A more common change is bandlike superficial dermal
fibrosis. Ulceration can cause disappearance of the epidermis and even of the dermis and
underlying cartilages. In rare advanced cases, activity in the cells of the basal layer is
increased, and large, polyhedral tumor cells that invade the dermis and subcutaneous

FIGURE 16-2. Feline solar dermatitis. Chronic exposure has resulted in dysplastic changes characterized by alopecia, scaling, thickening, and curling of the pinnae.

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1077

tissue are formed. A squamous cell carcinoma forms, and cords of neoplastic cells invade
the tissue to the level of the nasal cartilage.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
After the diagnosis is confirmed, the pre-existing lesions must be treated, and, most
important, new lesions must be prevented. In early cases, photoprotection allows the
lesions to heal spontaneously. In more advanced cases, corticosteroids are necessary to
decrease the inflammation. Although topical products are most beneficial, many dogs
resent their thorough application, and thus the oral route is commonly used. Prednisolone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h) administered for 7 to 10 days should be sufficient. If the lesions shows
cytologic evidence of bacterial infection, antibiotics should be administered.
Avoidance of direct or reflected sunlight is paramount, especially in chronic cases in
which solar sensitivity is extreme.P'' During the summer, the most dangerous photoperiod
is from 9 AM to 3 PM, with the peak from 11 AM to 2 PM. Affected dogs should be kept
indoors or in the shade during these times. When indoors, the dog can sunbathe beneath
a closed window because glass effectively filters DVB, but open windows or doors defeat
the purpose of the animal's being kept indoors." Reflections from white concrete sidewalks or run flooring must also be avoided.
Strict photoisolation is usually impossible, and sunblocks or sunscreens can allow some
sun exposure." Sunblocks are opaque agents that reflect and scatter incident light. White
or colored zinc oxide preparations are most commonly used in humans and may be of
benefit in dogs that do not lick the area. Most clients prefer sunscreens that are clear and
absorb incident light. Most products absorb only DVB, but some agents contain ingredients to screen UVA as well. Waterproof products with a sun protective factor (SPF) of 15
or higher should be used." SPF 15 products absorb more than 92% of the incident UVB
and are sufficient to protect most animals.s? For maximal efficacy, the product should be
applied and gently rubbed into the area 15 to 30 minutes before sun exposure. When
solar exposure is unpredictable, the sunscreen should be applied twice daily on a regular
basis."
The addition of artificial pigmentation to the area can be beneficial, but does not
negate the need for other measures, because black skin can still absorb some sunlight and
be bumed.f Black ink can be applied to the skin's surface with felt-tipped markers or by
a cotton-tipped applicator (Q-tip) with permanent laundry or stamp pad ink. Markers are
easiest to use, but the solvents can be irritating. Permanent coloring can be achieved by
tattooing. Tattooing was popular in the past, but poor early results, the expense of the
equipment, the need for multiple treatments under general anesthesia." and rare adverse
reactions to the tattoo ink"? have limited its use. Most of the early treatment failures were
because skin with an active immune-mediated disorder (e.g., discoid lupus erythematosus)
but not true solar dermatitis was tattooed. Tattooing should be considered when other
photoprotection measures are ineffective.
Although some benefit may be seen with the administration of B-carotene,75 treatment
with systemic agents usually is unrewarding. Preliminary work has shown that topically
applied vitamin C can help protect pig skin against DVL damage when the vitamin C is
applied after irradiation." This treatment or the oral administration of vitamin C mayor
may not be beneficial in dogs.
When the solar dermatitis progresses to an actinic keratosis or squamous cell carcinoma or results in massive tissue destruction, treatments with retinoic acid, hyperthermia,
cryosurgery, surgical excision, photochemotherapy, or radiotherapy may be of some benefit, but efficacy data are limited." Patients requiring these treatments have a poor prognosis.

Feline Solar Dermatitis
Feline solar dermatitis is a chronic actinic dermatitis of the white ears and, occasionally,
the eyelids, the nose, and the lips of cats, which is caused by repeated sun exposure," 83, 96,102
It can develop into an actinic keratosis or true squamous cell carcinoma."?

1078 • Environmental Skin Diseases

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The disease occurs in white cats or in colored cats with white-haired areas on the face or
ears. Blue-eyed, white cats are most susceptible. Actinic damage to the ear tip occurs
from repeated exposure to UVB light. Early lesions are often ignored or unrecognized,
but the damage makes the area more susceptible to further actinic insults. The disease
occurs mostly in warm, sunny climates such as those of California, Florida, Hawaii,
Australia, and South Africa. Sixteen cats with solar dermatitis were examined for heme
biosynthesis abnormalities, but none were demonstrated.P'
CLINICAL FEATURES
The earliest sign is erythema and fine scaling of the margin of the pinna. The hair is lost
in this area, making it even more accessible to solar radiation. There is almost no
discomfort to the cat at this stage. In susceptible cats, the first lesions can occur as early
as 3 months of age. Lesions become progressively more severe each summer. The advancing lesions consist of severe erythema of the pinna, peeling of the skin, and formation of
marginal crusts (see Fig. 16-1B and 16-2). At this stage, many cats demonstrate that
they are in pain and further damage their ears by scratching. The margins of the pinnae
may be curled. The margins of the lower eyelids, nose, and lips may be affected,
especially in white, blue-eyed cats. An actinic keratosis or invasive squamous cell carcinoma can develop in some cases on the ears, the nose, or other areas (see Fig. 16-1C
and D). Carcinomatous change may occur, usually after 6 years of age, but sometimes as
early as 3 years. The squamous cell carcinoma appears as an ulcerating, hemorrhagic, and
locally invasive lesion. It is partially crusted and, in advanced cases, destroys the pinna
(see Fig. 16-1E).
DIAGNOSIS
A tentative diagnosis of feline solar dermatitis can be made from the clinical appearance,
the color of the cat, and the history. As in the dog, the question remains as to whether
the cat has a primary or secondary solar dermatitis. For pinnal lesions, the primary
differential diagnostic considerations include dermatophytosis, early notoedric mange, fight
wounds, vasculitis, and possibly frostbite or cryoglobulinemia. Discoid or systemic lupus
erythematosus and pemphigus erythematosus or foliaceus may have to be considered. The
differential diagnostic possibilities are excluded by skin biopsy, which also detects dysplastic or neoplastic changes.
Histopathologic study shows that, in the early stages, superficial perivascular dermatitis (spongiotic, hyperplastic changes) is present. Vacuolated (sunburn cells) or apoptotic
keratinocytes may be seen. Solar elastosis may be noted in the superficial dermal connective tissue. With the formation of squamous cell carcinoma, the epidermal surface is
ulcerated and the dermis is invaded by nests of polyhedral epithelial tumor cells. In a
disorganized manner, these cells resemble the stratum spinosum. Their nuclei vary moderately in size, and mitotic figures are frequent. In advanced cases, the masses of tumor
tissue extend to the level of the cartilage.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Affected cats should be kept indoors from 9 AM to 3 PM and should not be allowed to
sunbathe by open doors or windows. During the summer, the ears should be protected
with a waterproof sunscreen. B-Carotene and canthaxanthin (25-mg doses of active carotenoids) are administered orally to treat feline solar dermatitis.P' Only the most severely
affected cats fail to respond. Carotenoids are thought to quench the triplet state of singlet
oxygen and free radicals and possibly to form a lipid-carotene complex in skin that absorbs
the damaging solar radiation.
After early irreversible lesions develop, serious consideration should be given to a

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1079
cosmetic amputation of the ear tips. This merely rounds off the ears, removes the thinly
haired tips, and allows hair to cover and protect the pinna. Results are usually excellent,
cosmetically and prophylactically. Photoprotection is necessary to prevent new lesions.
Cats with actinic keratoses who are not candidates for surgery may benefit from
treatment with retinoic acids. Although isotretinoin at 3 mg/kg was ineffective." more
recent studies with etretinate (10 mg per cat q24h) have shown some promise." Etretinate is no longer available in the United States, but acetretin could be used at 5 to 10 mg
per cat q24h. If retinoid treatment is ineffective, superficial irradiation (plesiotherapy) with
a hand-held strontium probe can be beneficial. If all of the above-mentioned therapies fail
or the cat has advanced disease at presentation, radical amputation of the pinna (pinnectomy) is necessary.

Canine Solar Dermatitis of the Trunk and Extremities
Although the nose and the ears are the areas most exposed and, therefore, are most
susceptible to actinic damage, other regions of the body can also be affected. A solar
glossitis is recognized in sled dogs. 2 A combination of factors is necessary for sun damage
to occur. First, the skin must be unpigmented or poorly pigmented. Second, only a sparse
haircoat covers the skin, allowing the ultraviolet rays of the sun to reach the epidermis.
Third, the areas so predisposed must be exposed to the sun. This occurs in dogs that like
to sunbathe or that are confined to areas where no sun shelter is available during the
middle of the day, especially if the ground cover is highly reflective. As is true of the
other types of solar dermatitis, the chance of actinic disease is increased in sunny climates.
Breeds predisposed to truncal solar dermatitis include the Dalmatian, American Staffordshire terrier, German shorthaired pointers, white Boxers, Whippets, Beagles, and
white Bull terriers." 74, 75, 83, 86, 96 The flank and the abdomen are the areas most severely
affected (see Fig. 16-1F and G). In dogs who sunbathe in right or left lateral recumbency, the flanks and the ventrolateral abdomen are most commonly affected, but lesions
can be seen on the nose, the ears, the tail tip, or the distal limbs. Dogs that sunbathe on
their back or that are caged on wire above white concrete can have the entire ventrum
involved. The duration of exposure influences the damage done. A Single prolonged
exposure as might occur in cool weather or with a strong breeze results in full-thickness
necrosis." At first, regular sunburning occurs and the affected areas are erythematous and
scaly. One to three days later, the site becomes extremely tender and will become
necrotic. With repeated but episodic exposure, the initial sun burning is followed by an
actinic folliculitis, actinic follicular cyst formation, or dermal fibrosis." Running a hand
over affected areas of skin may produce a bumpy feeling, because the white areas of skin
are thickened, whereas the black areas are normal. At this stage, biopsy reveals variable
degrees of superficial perivascular dermatitis and folliculitis. Superficial dermal fibrosis
may be prominent. Solar elastosis may be seen (Fig. 16-3).
With chronic exposure, the sunburned areas become thicker and develop erosion,
ulceration, crusting, and comedones, and they occasionally develop necrosis, fistulae, and
scarring. At this stage, a skin biopsy may reveal follicular cysts, pyogranulomatous inflammation, and premalignant actinic keratosis. Finally, a squamous cell carcinoma can develop, especially if the dog continues to be exposed to direct sunlight. Such squamous cell
carcinomas should be removed surgically, and the procedure should be repeated, if
necessary. There is always a danger of metastasis to the regional lymph nodes and internal
structures. Skin with solar damage is also more likely to develop a hemangioma or
hemangiosarcoma."
Therapy involves photoprotection by keeping the animal out of the sun and by using
topical sunscreens and T-shirts if practical. It has been reported that B-carotene (30 mg
orally q12h for 30 days, then q24h for life), in combination with anti-inflammatory doses
of prednisone or prednisolone, is effective in early cases." Etretinate at 1 mg/kg every 24
hours or divided every 12 hours is -effective when dysplastic change has occurred."
Etretinate is no longer available in the United States, but acetretin could be used at 0.5 to
1 mg/kg q24h.

I 080 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-3. Solar elastosis. Degeneration of elastin fibers. (Courtesy
A. Hargis.)

Photosensitivity
Photosensitivity occurs when the skin has an increased susceptibility to nonbuming doses
of UVL. The increased susceptibility is due to the production of (e.g., congenital or
acquired porphyrial.t" lOB ingestion of (e.g., drugs), or contact with a photodynamic
agent. 26 Photosensitization is uncommon in dogs and cats.
Unlike solar dermatitis, lesions of photosensitivity occur in well-haired regions of the
body. The hairs must be light in color. Most cases are recognized in the white regions of
black-and-white-coated dogs or cats;"- 32. 51 but generalized disease has been reported in a
Siamese cat and yellow Labrador retriever with acquired porphyria.t?
In black-and-white animals, the tentative diagnosis of photosensitization is straightforward. The white-haired areas are involved, whereas the immediately adjacent black-haired
skin is normal. Early on, the affected skin is red and can return to normal once the
animal is removed from the sun. In more sensitive animals, the skin ulcerates and
becomes necrotic. In porphyric animals, systemic signs (e.g., hyperthermia) can accompany
the skin lesions.
As in all solar diseases, the animal should be removed from sunlight immediately and
should be bathed if a contactant is likely. Every effort should be made to identify the
sensitizing agent, but most cases defy diagnosis.

Actinic Keratosis
Actinic keratoses may be seen in dogs and cats and are premalignant epithelial dysplasias
(see Chap. 20).

Miscellaneous Effects of Solar Exposure
Exposure to UVL is an important factor in precipitating or potentiating a number of skin
lesions and may also exacerbate generalized systemic disease acttvity." 66. 67 Although the
role of UVL is clearly defined in some conditions, its pathogenic role in other disorders is
less well understood. For example, UVL exposure may induce or exacerbate the lesions of
discoid lupus erythematosus, systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus (especially pemphigus erythematosusl." and pemphigoid (see Chap. 9).
In addition, UVL exposure of skin has important local and systemic immunologic
consequences (photoimmunologic changesr." For example, exposure to UVB or UVA

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1081
changes Langerhans' cell morphologic features and function, and influences cutaneous
cytokine production. Impaired antigen recognition and processing and impaired immune
responses may influence susceptibility to cutaneous neoplasms and infections. The damaging effects on cutaneous immunity of low-dose UVB are genetically determined in mice.l'"
This UVB susceptibility is mediated almost exclusively by tumor necrosis factor-a
(TNF-a), and the trait appears to be a risk factor for the development of squamous cell
carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma.

• IRRITANT CONTACT DERMATITIS
Contact dermatitis is an inflammatory skin reaction caused by direct contact with an
offending substance.F: 82. 83

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The disease is divided into two types: primary irritant contact dermatitis and contact
hypersensitivity-' (see Chap. 8). Newer information blurs the distinction between immunologic and nonimmunologic events, and makes the distinction between these two entities
problematic.P"
Primary irritant contact dermatitis causes cutaneous inflammation in most exposed
dogs and cats without any antecedent period of sensitization. The rapidity of onset and
the intensity of the reaction depend on the nature of the contactant, its concentration, and
the duration of the contact. Corrosive substances such as strong acids and alkalies injure
the skin immediately and produce lesions of varying severity. Severe reactions should be
classified as chemical burns. Less potent contactants need prolonged or repeated contact
to produce irritation. A number of primary irritants such as soaps, detergents, disinfectants, hair-coloring agents, weed and insecticidal sprays, fertilizers, strong acids and alkalies, and flea collars are potential causative agents. 1. 10, 81-83 Although most primary irritants
are chemicals, similar skin lesions can be produced by thermal injuries, solar overexposure, and contact with living organisms and plants.
In humans, irritant contact dermatitis is more common in the young and in atopic
individuals.P" The authors believe this to also be true in dogs and cats.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Irritant contact dermatitis can affect any animal of any age. Whereas atopic dogs, German
shepherd dogs, Poodles, and several other breeds appear to be at an increased risk for
contact hypersensitivity, no breed predisposition is recognized in irritant contact dermatitis. ll3 However, animals with skin disease have lost one or more protective layers (e.g.,
hair) of their defense system and probably are at increased risk as a secondary phenomenon.
Environmental irritants such as fertilizers and carpet cleaners typically produce dermatitis in areas where the haircoat is thin or missing. The abdomen, the chest, the axillae,
the flanks, the interdigital spaces, the legs, the perianal area, and the ventral surface of
the tail are the most susceptible areas (Fig. 16-4A and B; also see Fig. 16-1H). When
the offending agent is a liquid (e.g., shampoo and flea dip solution) or a topical medication (see Fig. 16-4C) or is bound to a collar (see Fig. 16-4D and E), the reaction occurs
where the substance touches the skin. Licking of the contactant can cause oral lesions
(Fig. 16-4F) and spread the agent to other areas of the body.
Patches of erythema and papules represent primary lesions (see Fig. 16-4A). Vesicles
are rarely present in dogs and cats (see Fig. 16-4C). As the disease progresses, crusts,
excoriations, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification occur. Intense pruritus may promote
severe scratching and biting. Pyotraumatic dermatitis and eventual ulceration may obliterate primary lesions.

1082 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-4. A, Contact dermatitis due to a floor cleaner. B, Contact dermatitis caused by a caustic cage
cleaner. C, Acute vesicular eruption due to an ear medication. D, Contact dermatitis caused by a leather collar.
E, Acute erythema and erosion due to flea collar dermatitis. F, Cheilitis and gingivitis due to contact with a lawn
fertilizer. G, Irritant contact dermatitis affecting the delicate scrotal skin. H, Full-thickness thermal bum in a Silky
terrier, with sloughing and infection.

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1083
Single episodes are common in primary irritant contact dermatitis, as in scrotal
involvement from soap that is not rinsed off (see Fig. 16-4G). Seasonal recurrence results
from exposure to plants, lawn fertilizer, herbicides, and ice-melting substances.
DIAGNOSIS
The tentative diagnosis of contact dermatitis is based on historical and physical findings. If
multiple animals in a household are affected, primary irritant contact dermatitis is much
more likely than contact hypersensitivity. When the contactant is harsh and produces
immediate reactions or is applied intentionally (e.g., medication), the diagnosis is straightforward. With low-grade environmental contactants, identification is more difficult, and
atopy, food hypersensitivity, drug reaction, Malassezia dermatitis, and early scabies must
be considered.
In most clinical cases, the histopathologic changes of primary irritant contact dermatitis consist of nondiagnostic superficial perivascular dermatitis (spongiotic, hyperplastic
changesl.P" The exact appearance depends on the stage of contact dermatitis and the
effects of secondary infection and excoriation. Neutrophils or mononuclear cells may
predominate in a given case.
The confirmation of irritant contact dermatitis can be made by provocative exposure
testing, in which the agent is applied to normal and diseased skin. With low-grade
irritants, one application to normal skin may not be sufficient to cause irritation, so
diseased skin should also be challenged. With harsh irritants, which cause ulceration and
necrosis, provocative exposure testing should be avoided. Patch testing is of unproven
value in the diagnosis of irritant contact dermatitis.
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The difficult task of discovering and eliminating offending substances depends on the
correlation of a detailed history and a careful examination of the environment of the dog.
Soap, flea collars, grasses, pollens, insecticides, petrolatum, paint, wool, carpets, rubber,
and wood preservatives are examples of contact irritants. If the location of the initial
inflammation can be correlated with an agent that came in contact with that area, the
cause can sometimes be found. With removal of the irritant, the lesions should heal
spontaneously. For pruritic patients, a 5- to 7-day course of prednisone or prednisolone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h) can be beneficial.
When the contactant cannot be found, relief depends on systemic and topical therapy.
The involved areas should be bathed frequently with plain water or a mild, nonirritating
shampoo. Drying must be complete, because macerated tissue is more susceptible to the
irritant. For localized lesions, topical corticosteroids may be beneficial in controlling the
inflammation. For animals with widespread lesions, repeated 7- to lO-day courses or
alternate-day administration of oral steroids is necessary. Pentoxifylline (10 mg/kg q12h) is
beneficial in the treatment of contact hypersensitivity." It may be of benefit in irritant
dermatitis as well.

• BURNS
Superficial and deep bums are painful, often produce scarring, and are an important cause
of sepsis. Bum management is long and arduous.
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Bums can be caused by strong chemicals, electric currents, solar and microwave radiation,
and heat. 10, 18, 83, 94. 97, 106 Most cases in small animals are caused by heat from fires, boiling
liquids, electric heating pads, animal driers, and hot metals (e.g., mufflers and wood
stoves). The length of exposure and the temperature of the heat source are key in

I 084 • Environmental Skin Diseases

determining the extent of the bum. In pigs, water at 44°C (1l1.2°F) needed 6 hours of
contact to cause a bum, whereas temperatures of 70°C (158°F) or greater caused transepidermal necrosis in less than 1 second.l'" The temperature of flames, boiling liquids, and
common hot metal sources greatly exceeds 70°C (158°F), and bums occur instantaneously
with exposure.
Electric heating pads are a common unexpected cause of bums in small animals. Heat
output can vary from pad to pad and can fluctuate during use. At the lowest setting,
temperatures as high as 44°C (11l.2°F) can be achieved, whereas temperatures of 56°C
(132.8°F) can be obtained at the medium setting. lOB The bum potential of these pads is
modified by the padding surrounding the unit, the nature of the animal's coat, and several
other factors, but clearly, animals kept on these pads for prolonged periods are at great
risk. Large volumes of subcutaneous fluids may increase the animal's sensitivity and allow
burning at very low settings.
As discussed in the section on solar dermatitis, sunlight does most of its damage in
nonpigmented or lightly pigmented skin. However, black skin absorbs nearly 50% more
solar radiation than does white skin and intense solar exposure can cause thermal bums in
darkly pigmented dogs. This is demonstrated in the report of two Dalmatians who developed ulcerative, necrotic, crusted, plaquelike lesions in their black spots." Lesions developed 7 days after exposure of 4 hours or more to intense sunlight. Because solar bums
are rare in darkly pigmented skin, the animal should be evaluated for an underlying
irregularity in thermoregulation.
Bums of dogs and cats have been categorized into two types: partial-thickness bums
and full-thickness burns." Partial-thickness bums involve the epidermis and the superficial
dermis. Healing of the burned area can be complete with little or no scarring because of
re-epithelialization from the hair follicles and sebaceous glands. 34 In full-thickness bums,
there is complete destruction of all cutaneous structures. Without surgical intervention,
healing occurs via second intention with extensive sca~ripg.
The cause of the bum and the percentage of body involvement have great impact on
the patient's survival. Patients burned by fire are at great risk for damage to the respiratory tract, and chemicals can bum the mouth or other tissues if they are spread by licking
or careless handling by the owner.?? Heat causes capillary leakage at and distant to the
bum site. Patients with large bums experience fluid and electrolyte imbalances, and can
die rapidly if not treated appropriately.F-!"
Loss of the skin as a protective barrier opens the underlying tissue to invasive
infection. Although microcirculation is restored within 48 hours to areas of partial-thickness injury, the full-thickness bum is characterized by complete occlusion of the local
vascular supply. The avascular, necrotic tissue of the full-thickness bum, with impaired
delivery of humoral and cellular defense mechanisms, provides an excellent medium for
bacterial proliferation, with the ever-present potential for life-threatening sepsis. Initial
colonization of the bum wound surface by gram-positive organisms shifts by the third to
fifth day after the bum to an invasive gram-negative flora (especially Pseudorrwnas aeruginosa).

CLINICAL FEATURES
Bums caused by fire or contact with hot metal are obvious from the outset but may not
reach their full extent for 24 to 48 hours. Bums from microwave radiation, electric
currents, chemicals, and electric heating pads or cage driers can be more insidious,
because the haircoat may hide the trauma and the owner may be aware of only the
animal's apparent pain and its accompanying behavioral changes. is, 94, lOB When the animal
is presented for treatment of skin burned by heating pads or cage driers, the affected skin
is usually hard and dry. Chemical, electric, solar, or microwave bums are erosive to
necrotic in nature.l" IB, 94 These bums may also not be maximally expressed for an
additional 24 to 48 hours. Infection causes a purulent discharge and sometimes an
unpleasant odor. Large areas of necrotic skin may slough and reveal a deep, suppurating

Environmental Skin Diseases • I 085

wound (see Fig. 16-4H). If the skin is debrided and sutured, temporary closure may be
achieved. However, the sutured area almost always sloughs, leaving a large, raw surface.
If 25% of the body is involved in the bum, there are usually systemic manifestations,
including septicemia, shock, renal failure, and anemia. 34 • 97

DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis is straightforward if the client has observed the accidental burning. If the
bum was not observed or was malicious, the diagnosis can be more difficult, especially if
the bum is superficial. The histologic findings of a gradually tapering coagulation necrosis
of the epidermis and deeper tissues confirm a thermal or chemical bum. Superficial bums
produce full-thickness epidermal necrosis and resultant subepidermal vesicle formation
(Fig. 16-5). With microwave bums, there is full-thickness coagulation necrosis.P' Electric
bums may show a diagnostic histologic feature of a fringe of elongated, degenerated
cytoplasmic processes that protrudes from the lower end of the detached basal cells into
the space separating the epidermis and the dermis. The nuclei of the basal cells and often
of the higher-lying epidermal cells appear stretched in the same direction as the fringe of
cytoplasmic processes. This gives the image of keratinocytes that are "standing at attention" (see Fig. 2-32).

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
For minor and major bums, the initial wound management, after evaluation and stabilization as needed, is the same. 34 , 83,97 For extensive bums, prompt attention to the patient's
fluid and electrolyte balance is crucial for survival. Patients with chemical bums should be
bathed when possible to remove any residual agent. After the patient is stabilized, wound
management can begin. The best treatment of bums is the prompt surgical excision of the
diseased tissue with sutured wound closure. Except for small bums, this is impractical in
pets. Regardless of the location or the depth of the wound, removal of all debris, loose
skin, and necrotic tissue is imperative. The wound is thoroughly cleaned with povidoneiodine or some other suitable antiseptic cleaner and is debrided as needed. Daily hydrotherapy is used for complete cleaning of all bum wounds. Suturing is seldom necessary,
because the sutured area almost always sloughs. After all bum wounds have been adequately cleaned and debrided, local care consists of the application of topical antimicrobial
agents. Occlusive bum wound dressings are avoided because of their tendency to produce
a closed wound with bacterial proliferation and to delay healing. Nonocclusive dressings,

FIGURE 16-5. Thermal bum.
Superficial dermal edema and epidermal necrosis resulting in epidermal separation. Follicular necrosis is
also visible.

I 086 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-6. Legend on opposite page

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1087
changed frequently, can be useful in certain cases. The wound should be cleaned two or
three times daily and the topical product should be reapplied.
In human patients with bums, a 0.5% silver nitrate solution, silver sulfadiazine,
mafenide acetate (Sulfamylon) cream, and iodophors receive wide use." The silver nitrate
solution is used as a wet dressing and is considered effective. Because most veterinary
patients do not tolerate wet dressings, silver sulfadiazine is probably the most commonly
used bum cream. 78 , 83 It is nonstaining, painless, and has fair penetration of an eschar.
Practitioners report excellent results with mupirocin ointment (Bactoderm, Pfizer Animal
Health)." The technical information on this product warns of nephrotoxicity due to
absorption of the polyethylene glycol in the base. Treatment of large deep bums could
result in renal failure. Systemic antibiotics are not effective in preventing bum wound
infection and may allow invasion by resistant organisms.
Bum healing is slow, with weeks to months of treatment. Most bums that receive
veterinary attention are full thickness and heal as hairless areas with scarring (Fig.
16-6A). In some cases, the scarring impedes function and various plastic surgical procedures must be performed. After all of these obstacles are overcome, most patients lead a
normal life. Because the scarred skin is hairless and often nonpigmented, solar exposure
should be limited. Bum scar malignancies have been reported in dogs, so the areas should
be examined periodically.'?

• RADIANT HEAT BURNS
Prolonged, repetitive exposure to hot radiant heat sources (e.g., wood stoves, infrared
lamps) can result in thermal bums. 19 , 22 Considering the frequent use of wood stoves in
the colder climates and the tendency for dogs and cats to lie extremely close to them,
radiant bums should be considered rare.
Dnlike a conduction bum, which occurs in areas of contact with a known high
temperature heat source, radiant bums occur over the dorsum and lateral chest walls
without a history of exposure. Because the owner never sees the dog touch the stove, they
do not associate the skin disease with heat source and will not volunteer that history.
Radiant bums occur in a driplike configuration with hair loss, erythema, and ulceration (see Fig. 16-6B). Adjacent haired skin can be hyperpigmented. With dorsally
oriented, well-established lesions, as shown in the figure, the differential diagnosis is
limited to a caustic or malicious thermal bum. The diagnosis can be confirmed by skin
biopsy. Nonulcerated lesions are hyperplastic with surface and infundibular hyperkeratosis.
There is focal hydropic degeneration of the basal cells with pigmentary incontinence.
Occasional apoptotic cells can be seen scattered in the suprabasilar layers. Superficial
dermal mucinosis is a consistent finding.
Once the animal is removed from exposure, the lesions heal spontaneously and
relapses are prevented by management changes.

• RADIATION INJURY
Skin changes are an expected consequence of radiation therapy and are somewhat dose
dependent. With treatment, the mitotic activity of the epidermis, melanocytes, hair follicles, and sebaceous gland stops. After a 2- to 3-week lag period, the treated area becomes

FIGURE 16-6. A, Permanent scarring and depigmentation from a healed bum. The dog is now susceptible to solar
dermatitis, B, Radiant heat bum. Erythema, erosion and ulceration, and crusting in a driplike fashion on the chest walL
Area was clipped. C, Frostbite. Pinnal necrosis and ulceration. D, Frostbite. The tip of the pinna has sloughed. E, Frostbite.
Necrosis of the distal tail. F, Tissue slough secondary to deep vascular occlusion. G, Pedal necrosis secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation. H, Pedal necrosis in a kitten fed an inappropriate milk replacement.

1088 • Environmental Skin Diseases

hairless, depigmented, and scaly.24. 25 Depending on the dosage administered and the
sensitivity of the patient, no further damage will occur and the area will heal in 2 to 3
months. The leukotrichia (Fig. 16- 7) mayor may not be permanent. In some animals,
the blood vessels are damaged enough to result in clinical signs ranging from a red,
edematous swelling to full-thickness necrosis.
In most instances, the skin changes are minor and need no treatment. With tissue
necrosis, the devitalized skin should be removed, but efforts to close the defect should be
postponed until the extent of the vascular damage is known .

• FROSTBITE
Cause and Pathogenesis
Frostbite is an uncommon condition in healthy animals who have been acclimatized to the
cold. III animals or those that have recently moved from a warm climate to a cold one are
more susceptible. Frostbite is due to prolonged exposure to freezing temperatures or
contact with frozen metal objects. If the animal has a pre-existing vasculopathy or cryoglobulinemia, external temperatures do not have to be very low to cause necrosis.P' The
lower the temperature, the greater the risk. Lack of shelter, blowing wind, and wetting
decrease the amount of exposure time necessary for frostbite to develop.
Clinical Features
Frostbite typically affects the tips of the ears, the digits, the scrotum, and the tail tip
because these areas are not well insulated by hair and the blood vessels are not well
protected.l- 83. 102 While frozen, the skin appears pale and is hypoesthetic and cool to the
touch. After thawing, there may be mild erythema, edema, pain, and eventual scaliness of
the skin. In mild cases, the hair of affected areas may turn white. Later, the tips and
margins of the pinnae may curl. In severe cases, the skin becomes necrotic and sloughs
(see Fig. 16-6C to E). Healing proceeds slowly; but if the tips of the ears are lost, the
remaining pinna of the ear has a rounded contour that is usually so cosmetically acceptable as to be unnoticed. Often, the lesions look similar to burns.
Clinical Management
One should rapidly thaw frozen tissues by the gentle application of warm water." Tissues
must be handled gently. In rats, administration of aspirin and pentoxifylline for 5 days

FIGURE 16-7. Permanent leukotrichia and hypotrichosis following pituitary irradiation.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I 089

after the freezing significantly improved tissue viability." In mild cases, the thawed skin is
red and scaly with little or no necrosis. Healing occurs spontaneously. In severe cases,
necrosis occurs and the affected tissue should be amputated, but not too early, because
more tissue may actually be viable than is initially suspected. Once frozen, tissues may be
more susceptible to subsequent damage by the cold. Ear tips that are permanently scarred
and alopecic could be treated beneficially by plastic surgery. This should remove the
hairless portion and leave the remaining pinna well covered with hair for protection from
the cold. Every effort should be made to keep these patients in protected quarters during
cold weather.

• MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES OF NECROSIS AND SLOUGHING
Tissue necrosis and sloughing typically are a result of a severe injury to the vasculature
supplying the area. Most lesions occur on nose, tips of the pinnae and tail, and extremities
because the vessels in those locations are most susceptible to environmental insult. When
caustic agents are injected extravascularly (Fig. 16-8) or tissues anywhere are distended
by the accumulation of gas, chyle, or fluids, the overlying tissues can become anoxic and
slough. I 5 , 33 There are many well-documented causes of peripheral cutaneous necrosis in
small animals, including solar dermatitis, frostbite, severe bums, exposure to caustic contactants, cold agglutinin disease, cryoglobulinemia, drug reaction, systemic lupus erythematosus, vasculitis (see Fig. 16-6F), snake bite, septicemia, and vascular insufficiency due to
pressure (pressure sore), traps, and elastic bands.P?
There are also some rare, often poorly documented or poorly understood associations.
Dogs may rarely have peripheral necrosis with ergotism and leptospirosis." Dry gangrene
of the pinnae was reported in cats fed decomposed scallops." Peripheral necrosis and
sloughing have been reported in dogs and cats with disseminated intravascular coagulation
(see Fig. 16-6G).83, 103 Digital or pedal sloughs have been recognized in cats with bron-

FIGURE 16-8. Early perivascular necrosis on the forelimb
following extravascular leakage of a barbiturate.

I 090 • Environmental Skin Diseases

chogenic carcinoma or follicular lymphoma, respectively." Necrosis and sloughing of the
digits have been reported as sequelae of hepatitis in dogs. 73 Necrosis and sloughing of the
digits have also been seen in puppies and kittens (see Fig. 16-6H) fed highly concentrated formulas containing evaporated milk,55,78 Neonatal isoerythrolysis was suspected as
a cause of tail tip necrosis in kittens (see Chap. 9). Necrosis has been associated with
sensory nerve damage either because it induces self-trauma (e.g., cauda equina syndrome
and so-called chilblains)57, 62 or because it interferes with proprioception (e.g., trophic
ulcer of the footpad)."

• SUBCUTANEOUS EMPHYSEMA
Subcutaneous emphysema is characterized by free gas in the subcutis. Possible causes
include air entering through a cutaneous wound, a lung punctured by a fractured rib,
internal penetrating wounds, extension from pulmonary emphysema, extension from tracheal rupture, and gas gangrene infections. With deep ulcers over active joints, air may be
"pumped" into the subcutis. It can also occur secondary to alveolar rupture associated
with positive-pressure ventilation" and following gastrostomy tube placement.P'
Subcutaneous emphysema is characterized by soft, fluctuant, crepitant, subcutaneous
swellings. The lesions are usually not painful, and the animals are not acutely ill, except in
the case of gas gangrene.
Diagnosis is based on history and physical examination. Treatment is directed at the
underlying cause. Sterile subcutaneous emphysema requires no treatment, unless it is
extensive and incapacitating, wherein multiple skin incisions may be necessary.

• SUBCUTANEOUS CHYLE
The subcutaneous accumulation of chyle has been reported subsequent to thoracic duct
ligation,33 and secondary to lymphangiectasis and lymphangiorna.P" The subcutaneous
swellings are fluctuant, nonpainful, and often occur in the groin and/or pelvic limb.
Aspiration cytology reveals chyle (triglyceride, cholesterol, protein, lymphocytes). Therapy
is directed at the underlying cause.

• SNAKE BITE
Two subfamilies of venomous snakes are indigenous to the United States: Crotalidae and
Elapidae. Crotalidae, commonly called pit vipers, include the copperhead, the cottonmouth moccasin, and the rattlesnake. One or more species of this subfamily are found in
virtually all of the 48 contiguous states. Elapidae are represented in this country by two
genera of coral snakes, which are found in only the southeastern and southwestern United
States. In Germany, common vipers (Vipera heros) are most problematic.v' In Australia,
brown, tiger, and black snakes account for most bites. 8o Vipera xanthina palestinae is the
major culprit in the Middle East."
Snake venoms contain over 25 toxic polypeptides, low-molecular-weight proteins, and
enzymes.P" 70. 71. 91, 98,104 Venoms vary in their toxicity between species of snake and within
a species depending on the habitat of the snake and season of the year. 48,49 In general,
venoms produce alterations in the resistance and integrity of blood vessels, changes in
blood cells and blood coagulation mechanisms, direct or indirect changes in cardiac
dynamics, alterations of nervous system function, depression of respiration, and necrosis at
the site of envenomation.l" Necrosis is much more common with pit viper bites than with
coral snake bites. 63, 71 The severity of a poisonous snake bite depends on the type and size
of the snake, the amount of venom injected in relation to the victim's weight, the site of
venom injection, and the time interval between the venom injection and the onset of
medical therapy."

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1091

Most snake bites occur during spring and summer, and animals in rural areas (especially near rodent burrows) are most at risk. In one study," young medium-to-large breed
dogs were at increased risk, especially German shepherds and Rottweilers (guard dogs,
trained to attack). The face and legs are most commonly involved. If there is no pain or
swelling at the bite site within 1Y2 hours of the bite, no venom was injected. Bites around
the face are potentially serious because of rapid swelling and respiratory embarrassment
(Fig. 16-9A). Cutaneous manifestations of snake bites with venom injection include rapid,
progressive edema, which usually obliterates the fang marks (see Fig. 16-9B); pain; and,
occasionally, local hemorrhage. Ecchymosis and discoloration become apparent several
hours later, and this area often becomes necrotic and sloughs.
All snake bites are potentially lethal, especially in small dogs or cats, and specific
wound treatments should be postponed until the patient is stable. Although there can be
some benefit to removal of local venom by suction, the stress to the dog or cat can
outweigh any potential benefits. Antivenin should be administered when available.s- 71. 91
In one study, the survival rate of dogs and cats treated with antivenom was 75% and 91%,
respectively. 50 The survival rate of those not treated was approximately 30% lower. For
maximum efficacy, the antivenom should be administered within 2 hours of the bite.
When administration is delayed for 8 hours or more, the antivenom is of little use.
Because these antisera contain horse serum, the patient should undergo skin testing with
the product before administration. Even with a negative test, reactions can occur, so the
patient should be monitored carefully for signs of anaphylaxis. Because snake bites are
contaminated by the oral flora, which often includes Pseudorrwnas sp. and Clostridium
tetani." broad-spectrum antibiotics and tetanus toxoids should be administered.
Beyond the above-mentioned measures, treatment recommendations vary. Some investigators administer antihistamines or corticosteroids, whereas other researchers do
not, 53, 71, 91 With pit viper bites, tissue slough can be expected, and the resulting wound
should be managed Similarly to a burn. 53

• FOREIGN BODIES
Foreign bodies occasionally cause skin lesions in dogs and cats. Although porcupine quills
(Fig. 16-10; also see Fig. 16-9C), suture materials (Figs. 16-11 and 16-12),23 air rifle
pellets, and road gravel are common foreign bodies, most are of plant origin (seeds and
awns, wood slivers). One of the most notorious plants in the United States in this regard
is the foxtail (Hordeum jubatum). A related plant (Hordeum murinum) causes problems in
France."
In a retrospective study of 182 cases of grass awn migration in dogs and cats in
California, younger dogs (with increased activity) and hunting and working breeds (with
increased exposure) were at greater risk.'! The most common site of grass awn localization
was the external ear canal (51% of cases), with the other common cutaneous sites being
the interdigital webs (see Fig. 16-9D). Lesions consist of nodules, abscesses, and draining
tracts. Secondary bacterial infection is exceedingly common.
Another common plant foreign body in the United States is the burdock (Arctium
Sp.).39 The burs of these common weeds become trapped in the haircoat, where they
often cause local irritation and mat formation. Dogs generally do not tolerate the burs
well, and chew and lick them from their fur. In doing so, the dogs may produce focal skin
lesions (see Fig. 16-9E) or, more commonly, oral lesions. The lesions of typical burdock
stomatitis are seen as (1) multiple 2- to 3-mm, whitish, shiny papules along the junction of
the upper buccal and gingival mucosa or (2) multiple, erythematous, granular papules and
plaques on the dorsal surface of the tongue (see Fig. 16-9F). Some dogs with burdock
stomatitis are remarkably asymptomatic, whereas other animals show typical signs of
stomatitis. Biopsies reveal the burdock (Fig. 16-13) and a nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous inflammation containing numerous eosinophils and centered on plant material
(Fig. 16-14).
Free hair shafts are a common endogenous foreign body in the dog. The hair can

1092 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-9. A, Profound facial edema secondary to a puff adder bite. (Courtesy P. Bland.) B, Snake fang
marks. (Courtesy D. Carlotti.) C, Porcupine quills. D, Digital draining tract secondary to foxtail penetration.
(Courtesy S. White.) E, Burdock dermatitis of the nose and muzzle. F, Burdock glossitis. G, Thallium intoxication.
Severe ulceration and crusting of the skin of the nasal region. A purulent exudate is present. H, Thallium
intoxication. Erythema, alopecia, and erosion of the digits and interdigital spaces.

Environmental Skin Diseases • 1093

FIGURE 16-10. Porcupine quill
lodged in a necrotic dermatitis.

reach the dermis either by being pushed through a normal hair follicle wall by constant
licking or when the inflamed follicle ruptures (Fig. 16-15). The rupture of the inflamed
follicle is most common and is a frequent sequela to bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis.
The foreign body reaction around the hair shaft (Fig. 16-16) complicates the treatment of
the primary follicular disease because it is difficult to determine what part of the patient's
symptoms and tissue inflammation is due to infection or the sterile reaction to the hair
shaft. Although exceptions can be found, it is best to assume that infection is still present

FIGURE 16-11. Large, tender granulomatous mass surrounding buried sutures at the site of a laceration repair.

1094 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-12. Fragments of
chromic gut suture surrounded by
pyogranulomatous inflammation.

when the lesion is tender to palpation. Clinically, significant foreign body disease is
suspected by: (1) the persistence of palpable, hard, painless dermal papules ("BBs") after
concurrent infection has been adequately treated, and (2) the recurrence of infection at
frequent intervals in these sites. Predilected areas of skin include the chin, interdigital
spaces, and periocular region. The treatment of choice of persistent hair shaft pyogranulomas or other foreign body reactions is surgical removal. When surgery is impossible,
topical glucocorticoid therapy is often useful.

FIGURE 16-13. Burdock fragment buried in the skin. Note
the visible barbing on the sides which prevents easy removal and
encourages inward migration.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I 095

FIGURE 16-14. Burdock surrounded by mixed inflammatory infiltrate .

• ARTERIOVENOUS FISTULA
An arteriovenous fistula is a vascular abnormality, defined as a direct communication
between an adjacent artery and a vein that bypasses the capillary circulation." Arteriovenous fistulae may be congenital or acquired and are rarely reported in dogs and
cats,!2, 17, 42, 45. 83, 110 Most clinically relevant cutaneous arteriovenous fistulae are acquired,
and most of these result from penetrating wounds or blunt trauma, although they may
also be secondary to infection, neoplasia, and iatrogenic factors (surgical declaw procedures and extravascular injections of irritating substances). Recurrent peripheral arteriovenous fistula has been reported in a cat with hyperthyroidism."
Acquired arteriovenous fistulae most commonly involve the paws (after declaw procedures or injury) and the neck (secondary to neoplasms), but they have involved the
temporal region, the pinnae, the legs, the flank, the prepuce, and the tongue. Affected
areas show persistent or recurrent edema, pain, and occasionally, secondary infection and
hemorrhage. Superficial blood vessels proximal to the fistula may be distinct and tortuous.
Arteriovenous fistulae are generally characterized by pulsating vessels, palpable thrills, and

FIGURE 16-15. Multiple residual papules and a nodule on the
back of a dog successfully treated
for bacterial furunculosis. The lesions
were sterile pyogranulomas surrounding free hair shafts.

1096 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-16. Granulomatous reaction around a fragment
of hair shaft.

continuous machinery murmurs. Occlusion of the artery proximal to the fistula results in a
sudden decrease in heart rate and disappearance of the murmur and thrill."
Diagnosis is based on the history, physical examination findings, and demonstration of
the arteriovenous fistula by contrast radiography. Therapy includes surgical extirpation of
the fistula or, in some instances, amputation of the affected part.

• MYOSPHERULOSIS
Myospherulosis is a rare granulomatous reaction thought to be due to the interaction of
ointments, antibiotics, endogenous fat, or oily contents of cysts with erythrocytes.P-P" 114 It
is associated with small saclike structures (parent bodies) filled with endobodies (spherules) and has been reported in humans and dogs. The condition has been induced
experimentally in laboratory animals. Myospherulosis is most commonly reported after
injections of oil medicaments or after the topical application of oily products to open
wounds. Because muscle is not always involved, it has been suggested that spheruloeytosis
or spheruloeytic disease might be a better designation for this entity.68
Patients are usually presented for solitary subcutaneous or dermal nodules, which may
or may not be discharging and are tender. 43 • 78 Histologic examination reveals several solid
and cystic masses. The walls of the cystic area and most solid areas are composed of
histiocytes with abundant vacuolated cytoplasm. Histiocytes surround parent bodies (30 to
350 m) composed of thin eosinophilic walls and filled with homogeneous eosinophilic, 3to 7-m spherules (Fig. 16-17). Parent bodies and spherules do not stain with periodic
acid-Schiff, Grocott-Gomori methenamine-silver, or Ziehl-Neelsen stains but are positive
for endogenous peroxidase (diaminobenzidine reaction) and hemoglobin, indicating that
the spherules are erythroeytes.l'"
The only effective treatment is surgical excision.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I 097

FIGURE 16-17. Myospherulosis. Macrophages containing many intracytoplasmic inclusions
(fragments of erythrocytes),

• THALLIUM TOXICOSIS
Thallium is a cumulative, general cell poison that may produce skin lesions or systemic
toxicity.f" 109, US

Cause and Pathogenesis
The use of thallium as a rodenticide and roach poison in the United States was banned
more than 25 years ago because of its toxicity. Despite the unavailability of thallium for all
these years, cases of thallium toxicosis are still occasionally recognized in the United States
from baits found in house walls, garages, and barns. log, us With doses of more than 20
mg/kg of body weight, the fatality rate is 100%, and the clinical signs are those of damage
to the central nervous system and circulatory system.s" Nervousness, convulsions, tremors,
salivation, weakness, and paralysis, together with a rapid, weak pulse, are seen. Reliable
early signs of less acute toxicity include vomiting, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, polydipsia,
pyrexia, and brick red mucous membranes. Colic and dyspnea are often apparent. Smaller
doses of thallium may be cumulative and may produce the subacute or a chronic syndrome. Even with the best of care, the mortality rate can be extremely high (70%);
therefore, the prognosis is poor. Thallium is rapidly absorbed through the oral and
intestinal mucosa and through the skin. It is mainly excreted in the urine, but it may
persist in various tissues for up to 3 months. Thallium and potassium move together
through cell walls and are excreted together in the urine. Therefore, increased turnover of
one substance increases the secretion of the other. In rats, cystine and methionine seem
to protect against the alopecic and toxic effects of thallium.
Researchers emphasize that thallium poisoning may be commonly unrecognized in
cats that do not show cutaneous involvement.P Although the syndrome with skin lesions is
classic and highly suggestive, cases of poisoning without skin lesions exhibit multisystemic
problems that necessitate a detailed case work-up and laboratory support for accurate
diagnosis. Even with intensive supportive care, only 19% of the feline patients in one
study recovered; thus, a poor prognosis must be given.83 Many of the antidotal drugs

1098 • Environmental Skin Diseases

suggested for other species are highly toxic to cats, and consequently, the clinician is
further handicapped in treating this species.

Clinical Features
Thallium poisoning is divided into two syndromes. In acute toxicity, the onset of signs is
delayed by 12 to 96 hours after ingestion, but the length of the course until death is only
4 to 5 days. Skin lesions are not seen in acute intoxication. If the animal ingests smaller
amounts or survives the peracute signs, severe gastrointestinal signs occur, which necessitate intensive supportive care. With ingestion of small amounts over some time, chronic
intoxication occurs. Signs may not develop for 7 to 21 days after ingestion and may not
reach their peak for an additional 21 days. Chronically intoxicated animals have hyperemic
mucous membranes, mild to moderate gastrointestinal signs, and skin lesions characterized
by erythema and hair loss. The hair loss is first noted in frictional areas, and ulceration
may follow the hair loss. Advanced cases have involvement of the face (see Fig. 16-9G),
the ears, the ventrum, the perineum, the feet (see Fig. 16-8H), and the mucocutaneous
junctions (Fig. 16-18A). The footpads become hyperkeratotic and ulcerated. Signs of
other organ involvement are common.

Diagnosis
Because thallium intoxication is rare, it often is not suspected. The primary differential
diagnostic possibilities to explain the systemic and cutaneous signs include drug eruption,
systemic lupus erythematosus, necrolytic migratory erythema, toxic epidermal necrolysis,
erythema multiforme major, lymphoreticular neoplasia, and the various rickettsial and
protozoal diseases. The diagnosis is confirmed by the detection of thallium in the urine by
a rapid colorimetric spot test (Gabriel-Dubin test) or absorption spectrophotometry." The
spot test is inexpensive and more readily available than absorption spectrophotometry, but
is less sensitive, with both false-positive and false-negative reactions reported. In most
cases, these urine tests are performed after skin biopsy results suggest thallotoxicosis.
Thallium exerts a local toxic effect on epidermal cells in the process of differentiation
leading to keratin formation. Degenerative changes are evident in the hair follicle and in
the surface epidermis.'?' The direct insult to the hair follicle is especially noteworthy in
anagen hairs; the hair shaft is converted to an amorphous mass, the bulb degenerates, and
the hair is lost (Fig. 16-19). Follicular plUgging and parakeratosis are prominent. The
surface epidermis shows massive parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and apoptosis with vacuolar
degeneration of keratinocytes (Fig. 16-20). Multiple spongiform microabscesses are
present in the superficial epidermis and the hair follicle's outer root sheath. The superficial dermis shows edema, vascular dilatation, and extravasation of erythrocytes.

Clinical Management
The prognosis in all cases of thallitoxicosis is grave, and most animals die. In mildly
intoxicated cases, supportive care with the administration of appropriate fluids, electrolytes, antibiotics, and so forth is paramount and may be the only treatment needed,
because the thallium is slowly eliminated from the body via the bile and urine. Various
specific treatments have been suggested, but none is without hazard. Aside from specific
adverse reactions for each agent, all can precipitate a thallium crises by drawing thallium
from tissues into the blood. Because of this rebound, chelators such as dithizone (diphenylthiocarbazone) (70 mg/kg q8h) or dithiocarb sodium (diethyldithiocarbamate sodium)
(30 mg/kg q8h) are no longer recommended. 109, ll5 Gastrointestinal trapping of the thallium with Prussian blue or activated charcoal may be of some benefit. The charcoal
appears to be more effective. Potassium chloride supplementation (1 to 2 g q8 to 12h)
promotes renal elimination by competing with thallium for distal tubular reabsorption.
Patients should be monitored for signs of cardiac and renal toxicity. Combination treatment with charcoal and potassium chloride has been suggested. 109 , ll5

Environmental Skin Diseases • I099

FIGURE 16-18. A, Early inflammation and crusting of the eyelids and lips of a cat with thallium poisoning.
(From Zook BD, et al: Thallium poisoning in cats. JAVMA 153:285, 1968.) B, Callus dermatitis. Note intertriginous folds in the thick, rugose callus. C, Sternal callus in a dachshund. D, Pressure sore in the hock region. E,
Severe matting predisposes the animal to pyotraumatic dermatitis. F, Pyotraumatic dermatitis with sharp margins.
G, Pyotraumatic dermatitis typically develops rapidly into a glistening, suppurative, hairless lesion bordered by a
band of erythematous skin. H, Facial fold intertrigo. The thumb is pulling the lip forward to expose the
erythematous, infected crevice hidden in the fold.

I I 00 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-19. Thallium toxicosis. Follicular necrosis and
degeneration of hair shafts.

FIGURE 16-20. Thallium toxicosis. Marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis overlying epidermal hyperplasia and vacuolar degeneration of keratinocytes.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I I 0 I
If the animal survives the intoxication, the skin lesions heal spontaneously with complete hair regrowth. Bathing with mild shampoos or hydrotherapy can accelerate the skin's
healing but may unduly stress the animal .

• MISCELLANEOUS TOXICOSES
Veterinary textbooks on toxicology mention skin changes for many compounds.s? Most
cases involve farm animals, but pets can be equally as susceptible. The agents can cause
skin lesions by direct action on the skin, by altering levels of vital nutrients, or by altering
the function of other organs. The number of cases of reported cutaneous toxicoses in
small animals is small, but these cases are probably underreported.
Arsenic is a general tissue poison that combines with and inactivates sulfhydryl groups
in tissue enzymes. 29 , 85 Sources of arsenic include herbicides, rodenticides, pesticides, and
arsenical medicaments. Signs of arsenic toxicosis vary according to the dose, the physical
form, the route of administration, and the composition (organic or inorganic).
Arsenic toxicosis was reported in a mature dog presented for listlessness, anorexia,
weight loss, rough coat, swollen muzzle, and necrosis and ulceration of the pinnae, feet,
lips, and prepuce." A container of liquid insecticide (44% sodium arsenite) was found to
be leaking into the dog's house. Arsenic concentrations were found at toxic levels in urine,
blood, feces, and hair. Bathing the dog and cleaning up its environment resulted in
complete remission within 1 month. Chronic arsenic toxicosis is a known cause of Bowen's
disease in humans." Although cases in animals (see Chap. 20) do not appear to be
associated with arsenic poisoning, it should be considered, especially when the animal has
intercurrent gastrointestinal signs.
Mycotoxins are toxic metabolites produced by molds. Intoxication occurs by ingestion
of spoiled grain or grain products. Ergotism was the first recognized mycotoxicosis and has
been reported to cause necrotizing skin lesions in dogs.30 A case of necrolytic migratory
erythema (see Chap. 10) was reported in a dog that ate moldy biscuit meal containing
ochratoxin A, citrinin, and sterigmatocystin.s'' Because most owners do not feed obviously
spoiled foods, this may be an isolated case. However, it does demonstrate that agents that
produce no direct skin signs can do so by altering the function of other organs .

• CALLUS AND HYGROMA
A callus is a round or oval hyperkeratotic plaque that develops on the skin, typically over
bony pressure points. The elbow and the hock are the most common sites. Dogs with
deep chests often develop sternal lesions. Large breeds are especially susceptible if the
dog sleeps on cement, brick, or wood. Many adult dogs develop varying degrees of callus.
Dogs that sleep in unusual positions because of orthopedic disease or that are hypothyroid
can have calluses in unusual locations. Callosities are a normal, protective response to
pressure-induced ischemia and inflammation." The callus is hairless and gray, and has a
wrinkled surface (see Fig. 16-9B). Histologically, there is irregular to papillated epidermal
hyperplasia and orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyperkeratosis. Small follicular cysts are
seen in the dermis.
Although calluses, especially those in unusual locations, can be mistaken for lesions of
ringworm, demodicosis, or other inflammatory disorders, diagnosis in most cases is
straightforward. Most callosities need no treatment, but some calluses necessitate treatment because the owner finds them objectionable or because they are extremely hyperplastic and become ulcerated or easily infected. Environmental modification is mandatory.
Padding (e.g., foam rubber pads, air mattresses, and straw bedding) must be provided,
and the dog must use it consistently, Padding efforts often frustrate the client because the
dog avoids the padding or destroys it. If the environment cannot be padded, the individual lesions can be protected by making pads for affected areas (e.g., elbow pads). With
some ingenuity, virtually any callus can be padded. Again, the dog can frustrate the effort

I 102 • Environmental Skin Diseases

by removing the pad. Mter padding is provided, the callus can be softened with any good
hand cream. In extreme cases, the callus can be removed surgically. This has to be
performed carefully because there can be excessive hemorrhage and sutures often do not
hold. Wound dehiscence is a possible complication of surgery.
Hygroma is a false or acquired bursa that develops subcutaneously over bony prominences.P Hygromas develop after repeated trauma-induced necrosis and inflammation
over pressure points. They are initially soft to fluctuant (fluid filled) but may become
abscesses or granulomas with or without fistulous tracts, especially if they are secondarily
infected.
Histologically, hygromas are characterized by cystic spaces surrounded by dense walls
of granulation tissue, the inner layer of which is a flattened layer of fibroblasts. Early
lesions usually respond well to loose, padded bandages applied for 2 to 3 weeks and
corrective housing. More severe lesions may necessitate extensive drainage, extirpation, or
skin grafting procedures.

• CALLUS DERMATITIS AND PYODERMA
Callus dermatitis is a secondary infection of a callus subjected to repeated trauma or
softened without the obligatory environmental modifications.

Cause and Clinical Features
The callus is the initial response to trauma. Continued trauma and the proliferative skin
reaction that follows produce crevices in the callus and intertriginous areas, which results
in a fold dermatitis. Additional trauma causes epidermal breakdown, ulceration of pressure
points, and fistulae. The lesions are most common over the hock and elbow joints of giant
breeds such as Great Danes, St. Bernards, Newfoundlands, and Irish wolfhounds (see Fig.
16-17B). Sternal calluses on the chest of Dachshunds, setters, Pointers, Boxers, and
Doberman pinschers may also become secondarily ulcerated and infected (see Fig.
16-17C). Often, there are no specific bacterial flora involved in this infection, although
staphylococci are commonly isolated. Pressure point granulomas, which contain free hair
shafts, may develop.
Ulcerated or fistulated lesions may be deeply infected, and exudative cytologic examination should be performed in all cases. The surface should be scrubbed, and the lesion
should be squeezed firmly before samples are collected. In many cases, pieces of hair
shafts pop to the surface. Infection usually results in a pyogranulomatous inflammation.

Clinical Management
Primary attention must be given to relieving the trauma so the tissue can heal. This can
be accomplished through the use of waterbeds, special bedding, pads for various body
parts, or a combination of these measures. In severe cases, surgical excision of the callus
may be indicated. This is major surgery with a difficult postoperative course, and the
reader is referred to texts on soft tissue surgery for details of treatment.
Mild surface inflammation and fold dermatitis can be relieved by daily whirlpool baths
in warm water. Distal lesions may be amenable to soaking in a bucket. With imbedded
hair shafts, a mildly hypertonic drawing solution of magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts)
(30 mliL or 2 tbsp/qt of warm water) can be beneficial. In noninfected lesions, hydrotherapy is typically sufficient to cause healing. When this is not possible, the topical application of an antibiotic cream or Preparation H, a human hemorrhoid preparation containing
live yeast extract and shark liver oil, can be beneficial.
Infected lesions necessitate a prolonged course with antibiotics. Six weeks or longer of
treatment is usually necessary. Because the infected tissue cannot return to normal condition with antibiotic treatment, the client is not able to determine when the infection is
resolved. Cytologic examinations should be performed every second week. When no sign
of infection is present, treatment should be continued for an additional 7 to 14 days.
Relapses are prevented by management changes.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I I 03

• VENTRAL COMEDONE SYNDROME
This is common in Creyhounds.l'" Friction and pressure-point contact with the ground
result in comedone formation on the sternum. Secondary bacterial infection produces
papules and pustules. Treatment includes comedolytic and antibacterial topical applications, and management changes.

• PRESSURE SORES
Pressure sores (decubital ulcers) result from prolonged application of pressure concentrated over a bony prominence in a relatively small area of the body. The pressure is
sufficient to compress the capillary circulation, causing tissue damage or frank necrosis.3D• 37. 83 The severity of pressure sores is variable, and as expected, more severe lesions
are difficult to treat. Grade I lesions affect the epidermis and superficial dermis, whereas
Grade IV lesions extend to the underlying bone.P" Grade II lesions stop at the subcutis,
and Grade III lesions involve the deep fascia. Pressure sores almost invariably become
infected with a variety of pathogenic bacteria. Within 24 to 48 hours, the edges of the
ulcerated area are undermined. Because of the area of capillary and venous congestion at
the base of the ulcer and tissue margins, systemic antibiotics do not penetrate well.
Animals that are recumbent for prolonged periods on hard surfaces are at increased
risk for pressure sores. Emaciation increases the susceptibility. Lesions are initially characterized by an erythematous to reddish purple discoloration. This progresses to oozing,
necrosis, and ulceration. The resultant ulcers tend to be deep, to be undermined at the
edges, to be secondarily infected, and to heal slowly (see Fig. 16-17D).
Prevention is paramount. AIl recumbent animals should be kept on a waterbed or
eggcrate foam rubber pad, be turned frequently, and receive a daily whirlpool bath. If a
pressure sore develops, additional padding should be supplied in that area. The wound
should be cleaned frequently with an appropriate antiseptic solution. If the patient recovers from its disease fairly quickly, the pressure sore should heal spontaneously but slowly.
Application of Preparation H, raw honey," mupirocin/" or hydrogen peroxide may accelerate healing. Although hydrogen peroxide at high concentrations is cytotoxic, low concentrations (1.5% to 3%) stimulate fibroblasts and angiogenesis, and can increase wound
healing.'!' In Grade II to IV lesions, surgery often is necessary to close the defect. 107
Surgery must be postponed until the animal is ambulatory, otherwise the wound dehiscence can be expected. Presurgical application of agents that encourage a healthy bed of
granulation tissue (e.g., Granulex, pfizer Animal Health) can be beneficial.

• TUG-Of-WAR BLISTERS
Dogs who play tug-of-war vigorously, especially with another dog, can develop blisters on
the digital and main pads of the front feet. Dogs who are tug-of-war fanatics and have a
high tolerance for pain are most at risk. Dr. Eve Brown, a practitioner in the Cornell
area, sees the condition often enough that she encourages her clients not to let their dogs
play tug-of-war.
The onset of signs is acute and is characterized by lameness. At examination, classic
frictional blisters are seen on one or more pads. Most of the blisters are ruptured, and
examination of the floor of the blister shows normal pad epithelium. This is in contrast to
more typical pad ulcers seen in dogs with mechanobullous diseases (see Chap. 12),
immune-mediated disorders (see Chap. 9), or those subject to severe, acute trauma (e.g.,
drag injuries), In the case of dogs with mechanobullous diseases or acute trauma, the
ulcers are sharply marginated and the dermis is visible.
With the appropriate history, the diagnOSis is straightforward. In a puppy, in which
there can be concern for an underlying hyperfragility of the pads, biopsies may be needed
to rule out other disorders. Treatment is simply palliative and involves cutting the separated pad away and protective bandaging. Because an intact epithelium exists at the
bottom of the blister, the dog should return to normal function quickly.

I I 04 • Environmental Skin Diseases

• PYOTRAUMATIC DERMATITIS
Pyotraumatic dermatitis (acute moist dermatitis, or "hot spots") is produced by selfinduced trauma as the patient bites or scratches at a part of its body in an attempt to
alleviate some pain or itch. 83 The majority of cases are complications of flea bite hypersensitivity, but allergic skin diseases, other ectoparasites, anal sac problems, inflammations
such as otitis externa, foreign bodies in the coat, irritant substances, dirty unkempt coats
(see Fig. 16-17E), psychoses, and painful musculoskeletal disorders may be underlying
causes. These factors initiate the itch-scratch cycle, which varies in intensity with individuals. The intense trauma produces severe large lesions in a few hours. Animals particularly
disposed to this problem are those with a heavy pelage that has a dense undercoat, such
as Golden and Labrador retrievers, Collies, German shepherds, and St. Bernards. The
problem is much more common in hot, humid weather and may be related to lack of
ventilation in the coat.
A typical lesion is red, moist, and exudative. There is a coagulum of proteinaceous
exudate in the center of the area surrounded by a red halo of erythematous skin. The hair
is lost from the area, but the margins are sharply defined from the surrounding normal
skin and hair (see Fig. 16-17F). The lesion progresses rapidly if appropriate therapy is
not started at once (see Fig. 16-17G). Much pain is associated with the local area, and
this may eventually deter the animal from further self-trauma. Lesions are often located in
close proximity to the primary painful process (e.g., near infected ears, anal sacs, and flea
bites on the rump).
True hot spots have bacteria colonizing the surface of the lesion but are not skin
infections. This is in contrast to pyotraumatic folliculitis (see Chap. 4) in which the dog
traumatizes the skin over a staphylococcal folliculitis or furunculosis." Without clipping
and palpating the lesion, it can be difficult (if not impossible) to differentiate pyotraumatic
dermatitis from pyotraumatic folliculitis.
Diagnosis is made by the history of acute onset, the physical appearance, and some
association with a primary cause. True pyotraumatic dermatitis is a relatively flat, eroded
to ulcerated lesion. Histologically (Fig. 16-21), the tissue reaction is acute, exudative, and
involves the surface epithelium only. Lesions that are thickened, are plaquelike, and are
bordered by papules or pustules (satellite lesions) should always suggest a primary eruptive process, especially a staphylococcal infection, which the dog has traumatized."
Therapy is effective if applied promptly and vigorously. Application of pramoxine
spray or conditioner, sedation, or anesthesia may be needed to allow thorough cleaning of
the area. Cleaning with povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine is the first and most important

FIGURE 16-21. Pyotraumatic
dermatitis. Traumatic erosion of the
epidermis with marked serum exudation. The hair follicles and midto-deep dermal tissues are normal.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I I 05

step in local therapy. Cleaning is more rapid and effective when the hair is clipped, but
clipping is not always possible in show dogs. In unclipped areas, the shampoo formulation
of the antiseptic should be used, whereas solutions are applied on clipped lesions.
After the wound is cleaned, the nature of additional treatments depends on the dog
and the investigator. A few dogs lose all interest in the lesion after they create it and only
require the application of a drying agent. A 2% aluminum acetate solution (Domeboro
solution), an aluminum acetate and 1% hydrocortisone solution, or a menthol and Hamamelis solution (Dermacool, Virbac) are commonly used products and can be effective."
The solution is applied two to three times daily until a healthy scab develops. Herbal
extracts are also reported to be effective, but detailed studies are lacking.1l 2
Because the lesion is inflamed and tender, most dogs need treatment with a corticosteroid. If oral corticosteroids are not contraindicated, prednisolone or prednisone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h) is most useful because the owner does not have to manipulate a tender
lesion. If oral drugs are contraindicated or the lesion is not severe enough to warrant
systemic treatment, topical agents can be used. Although many dogs have been successfully treated with a topical steroid (e.g., betamethasone valerate cream) alone, a recent
study showed that a neomycin-prednisolone combination was more effective than either
individual ingredient. lOG The prednisolone alone gave the poorest results. The duration of
treatment depends on the severity of the lesion and the agent used, but 7- to 14-day
courses are typical.
At the time of the initial treatment, it is most important to find the predisposing
factor and to eliminate or modify it to stop the patient's reflex self-trauma. The treatment
to accomplish this goal varies, depending on the primary cause. Some unfortunate dogs
have repeated problems. There is no Simple prophylaxis. Constant attention to grooming,
hygiene, baths, and parasite control and periodic cleaning of the ears and anal sacs helps.
Owners should be particularly vigilant during periods of hot, humid weather. Although
diet (e.g., high protein content) is often suggested as a cause, except for severe fatty acid
deficiency or food hypersensitivity, this has never been proved.

• INTERTRIGO
Intertrigo (skin fold dermatitis) is a frictional dermatitis that occurs in areas where two
skin surfaces are intimately apposed. The apposition results from the intentional breeding
of certain dogs (e.g., English bulldog and Chinese Shar pei) or cats (e.g., Persians) for
pronounced folding, congenital, or acquired anatomic defects; it may also result from
thickening of the dermis or subcutis caused by obesity, hormonal influences, or inflammatory skin disease. Skin rubbing against skin is irritating, and the areas where this occurs
have poor air circulation. If moisture, sebum, glandular secretions, and excretions such as
tears, saliva, and urine are present, these areas provide an environment that favors skin
maceration and bacterial or Malassezia yeast overgrowth. Although bacteria or yeast playa
central role in the pathogenesis of fold dermatitis, they rarely invade viable tissues, so the
old designation of fold pyoderma is inaccurate." The surface organisms act on the trapped
secretions and sebum, and produce breakdown products, which are irritating and odoriferous. As the irritants are rubbed on the apposed surface, inflammation results and produces the clinical signs of the disease and causes the increased production of more
irritants. A vicious cycle is created.
Satisfactory treatment of an intertrigo necessitates resolution of the inflammation and
exudation and elimination of the tissue apposition that triggered the intertrigo. If the
folding cannot be eliminated because the anatomic defect is uncorrectable or would
destroy the desired appearance of the animal, cure cannot be achieved and a long-term
control regimen should be instituted. In some animals, control measures do not work and
surgery is needed." When the folding can be eliminated, only a short course of treatment
is necessary to resolve the dermatitis.
Removal of the surface organisms and the entrapped debris is essential and necessitates the use of antiseborrheic products. Benzoyl peroxide-based or sulfur-based prod-

FIGURE 16-22. A, Lip fold intertrigo characterized by erythema, exudation, and fetid odor. B, Profound
folding predisposes this Shar pei to fold dermatitis. C, Neck fold intertrigo. D, Vulvar fold intertrigo with erosion.
E, Vulvar fold intertrigo. Severe dermatitis due to constant licking. F, Tail fold intertrigo in a dog with screw tail
conformation. (Courtesy P. Ihrke.) G, Close-up of the dog in F. (Courtesy P. Ihrke.) H, Calcinosis cutis secondary
to percutaneous penetration of calcium carbonate.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I 107
ucts, in gel, ointment, or shampoo formulations, are most commonly used. Although the
gels and ointments have better residual activity, they can be irritating and worsen the
inflammation if used at the onset of treatment. Most investigators use shampoos to gain
control and reserve the other formulations for maintenance treatments.
After the surface debris is removed, tissue inflammation can be eliminated by the
topical application of a corticosteroid cream or the oral administration of prednisolone
(1.1 mg/kg q24h). A 5- to 7-day course of treatment should be sufficient. In mild cases,
an aluminum acetate and hydrocortisone solution is very effective.
If the skin apposition cannot be eliminated (e.g., by surgery or weight loss), the
dermatitis recurs unless maintenance cleaning with an antiseborrheic product is instituted.
For folds of the face, the body, or the vulva, the daily application of a plain or medicated
talc can be beneficial and reduce the amount of bathing required. Lip, vulvar, and tail
folds are usually not amenable to talcing. The talc is applied carefully to the crevice of
each fold. Before the next application, the previous day's dose must be removed by
brushing with a dry cloth or by washing. If the area is washed, it should be dried
completely before the talc is reapplied. In many cases, the talcing can reduce the frequency of washing from once daily to once or twice weekly. When talcing is ineffective,
prophylactic application of a benzoyl peroxide gel can be extremely beneficial. When
Malassezia yeast predominate, commercial or homemade acetic acid products are beneficial.61
Facial fold intertrigo is seen in brachycephalic breeds, especially Pekingese, English
bulldogs, and Pugs (see Fig. 16-17H).83 It is also occasionally seen in Persian and
Himalayan cats. The fold may rub on the cornea and cause severe keratitis and ulceration.
The breed standards in some cases require a facial fold, so even though its presence may
damage the eye, one should be careful to explain the ramifications of surgical correction
to owners and should obtain their approval before ablating the folds.
Lip fold intertrigo is primarily an aesthetic problem to owners, because it produces
severe halitosis." Owners may need to be convinced that the small lip fold can produce
all that odor. This problem is prevalent in dogs with a large lip flap, such as spaniels and
St. Bernards (Fig. 16-22A). Malassezia overgrowth is extremely common in this area and
acetic acid treatments once to twice daily can be beneficial. Cheiloplasty is curative.
Body fold intertrigo occurs primarily in obese individuals, and in certain Basset
hounds and Chinese Shar pei dogs (see Fig. 16-22B and C).83 It is most common in Shar
pei puppies that have an increased number of folds and in those with a tendency to
seborrhea. As the puppies mature, they do grow out of their folds on parts of the body,
and therefore fold dermatitis in the adult Shar pei is more concentrated on the head and
face, where the folds persist. It may also be seen on the ventral midline of female dogs
and cats with intertrigo between pendulous mammary glands or with rolls of body fat.
Vulvar fold intertrigo is common in obese older female animals that have infantile
vulvae as a result of spaying at a young age (see Fig. 16-22D).83 The vulva is recessed,
and vaginal secretions and drops of urine may accumulate in the folds of the perivulvar
region. This is a special stimulus to ulceration and bacterial growth, and the odors
produced are especially unpleasant. Licking is a near-constant feature and worsens the
dermatitis (see Fig. 16-22E). Ascending bacterial urinary tract infections are a common
sequela to vulvar fold intertrigo. Several methods of management may help. Because
obesity is usually present, weight reduction is indicated. Estrogenic treatments can cause
vulvar enlargement with reduction of the folds, but the potential danger of such endocrine
therapy must be considered. Surgical vulvopasty (epistoplasty), with fixation of the dorsal
vulvar commissure to elevate the vulva out of the crevice, is curative. Squamous cell
carcinoma has been reported to arise from chronic vulvar fold dermatitis."
Tail fold intertrigo results from pressure of corkscrew tails on the skin of the perineum (see Fig. 16-22F and G). It is seen in English bulldogs, Pugs, Boston terriers, and
other breeds with that type of tail.83 In addition, a rump fold intertrigo may be seen in
certain Manx cats. In some cases, the tail may partially obstruct the anus, so that feces,
anal sac secretions, and other skin gland products enhance the skin maceration from the
intertrigo. Amputation resolves the problem, but the surgery is complicated.

I I 08 • Environmental Skin Diseases

FIGURE 16-23. Calcinosis cutis.
Coalescing papular lesions on the
edge of the main carpal pad of dog
that walked over a calcium-containing
ice melter.

• CALCINOSIS CUTIS
Calcinosis cutis involves the deposition of calcium salts in dermal tissues. Lesions can be
localized and secondary to trauma in normal or metabolically abnormal dogs (see Chap.
20) or widespread.P 41 In dogs, widespread calcinosis cutis typically occurs in spontaneous
or iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism (see Chap, 10), but several reports describe ventral
calcinosis caused by percutaneous penetration of calcium carbonate or calcium chloride,BB, 99 Lesions consisted of multiple erythematous, crusted, ulcerated papules and
plaques on the glabrous skin of the ventral abdomen, the inguinal region, and the medial
thighs (see Fig. 16-11H). The authors have also seen pedal lesions (Fig. 16-23) associated with calcium-containing ice melters.
When calcinosis cutis is recognized in glabrous areas or other areas of contact, the
owner should be questioned carefully about possible exposure to bone meal, landscaping
products, or bam dusts before adrenal function tests are performed. Once exposure to the
calcium is stopped, the lesions should resolve spontaneously. Treatment with DMSO gel
may hasten resolution of the lesions." A thin film should be applied once to twice daily.

• REFERENCES
1. Al-Bagdadi FK, et aI: Hair dye effects on the hair
coat and skin of the dog: A scanning electron microscopic study. Anat Ristol EmbryoI17:349, 1988.
2. Arnold P, et aI: Solare glossitis bei Schlittenhunden.
Schweiz Arch Tierheilk 140:328, 1998.
3. Aroch I, Harms S: Retrospective study of the epidemiological, clinical, haematological, and biochemical
findings in 109 dogs poisoned by Vipera xanthina
palestinae. Vet Rec 144:532, 1999.
4. Ascher F, et aI: Interet d'une solution topique non
antibiocorticoide dans Ie traitement de la dermatite
pyotraumatique du chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
30:345, 1995.
5. Ashley PF, Bowman LA: Symmetric cutaneous necrosis of the hind feet and multicentric follicular lymphoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:211,
1999.
6. Beale KM, Morris DO: Treatment of canine calcinosis cutis with dimethylsulfoxide gel. Proc Annu Memb

Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
14:97, 1998.
7. Bensignor E: Soleil et peau chez les carnivores
domestiques 1-effets des rayonnements solaires sur
les structures cutanees, Point Vet 30:225, 1999.
8. Bensignor E: Soleil et peau chez les carnivores
domestiques 2-affections photoinduites et photoaggravees. Point Vet 30:229, 1999.
9. Bergeaud P: Pathologies liees aux epillets. Point Vet
26:105, 1994.
10. Bilbrey SA, et al: Chemical bum caused by benzalkonium chloride in eight surgical cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 25:31, 1989.
11. Borum T: Management of decubital ulcers with the
topical application of raw honey. Mississippi Vet J
Summer:I6, 1986.
12. Bouayad H, et aI: Peripheral acquired arteriovenous
fistula: A report of four cases and literature review.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:205, 1987.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I I09
13. Bradley DM, et al: Biochemical and histopathological
evaluation of changes in sled dog paw skin associated
with physical stress and cold temperatures. Vet Dermatol 7:203, 1996.
14. Brennan KE, Ihrke PJ: Grass awn migration in dogs
and cats: A retrospective study of 182 cases. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 182:1201, 1983.
15. Brown DC, Holt D: Subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericardium associated with positive-pressure ventilation in a
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:997, 1995.
16. Brown DE, et al: Echinocytosis associated with rattlesnake envenomation in dogs. Vet Pathol 31:654, 1994.
16a. Burkett G: Skin diseases in greyhounds. Vet Med 95:
115,2000.
17. Butterfield AB, et al: Acquired peripheral arteriovenous
fistula in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:445, 1980.
18. Coyne BE, et al: Thennoelectric bums from improper grounding of electrocautery units: Two case
reports. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:7, 1993.
19. Darr D, et al: Protection against UVB damage to
porcine skin with topical application of vitamin C. In:
von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol 1. Bailliere Tindall, London, 1990, p 463.
19a. Darr D, Fridovich I: Free radicals in cutaneous biology. J Invest Dermatol 102:671, 1994.
20. Davidson EB, et al: Calcinosis circumscripta of the
thoracic wall in a German shepherd dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:153, 1998.
21. Day MJ: Expression of major histocompatibility complex class 11 molecules by dermal inflammatory cells,
epidermal Langerhans' cells and keratinocytes in canine dermatological disease. J Comp Pathol 115:
317,1996.
22. DeClercq J, Vanstapel M-J: Chronic radiant heat dermatitis (Erythema ab igne) in two dogs. Vet Dennatol
9:269, 1998.
23. DeNardo GA, et al: Comparison of seven different
suture materials in the feline oral cavity. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:164, 1996.
24. Dernell WS, Wheaton LG: Surgical management of
radiation injury-Part I. Comp Cont Ed 17:181,
1995.
25. Dernell WS, Wheaton LG: Surgical management of
radiation injury- Part 11. Comp Cont Ed 17:499,
1995.
26. Dolowy WC: Giant hogweed photodennatitis in two
dogs in Bellevue, Washington. J Am Vet Med Assoc
209:722, 1996.
27. Dunstan RW, et al: The light and the skin. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology Ill. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 3.
28. Evans AG, et al: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
treatment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
2553, 1985.
29. Evinger ]V, Blakemore JC: Dermatitis in a dog associated with exposure to an arsenic compound. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 184:1281, 1984.
30. Fadok VW: Necrotizing skin diseases. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy YIIl. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1983, p 473.
31. Fairley RA: Photosensitivity dermatitis in two collie
working dogs. N Z Vet J 30:61, 1982.
32. Fairley RA, MacKenzie IS: Photosensitivity in a kennel of Harrier hounds. Vet Dennatol 5:1, 1994.

33. Farnsworth R, Birchard S: Subcutaneous accumulation of chyle after thoracic duct ligation in a dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:2016, 1996.
33a. Fossum TW, et al: Generalized lymphangiectasis in a
dog with subcutaneous chyle and lymphangioma. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 197:231, 1991.
34. Fox SM: Management of thermal bums-Part I.
Comp Cont Educ 7:631, 1985.
35. Frank LA, Calderwood-Mays MB: Solar dermatitis in
dogs. Compend Cont Educ 16:465, 1994.
36. Frank LA, et al: Distribution and appearance of elastic fibers in the dennis of clinically normal dogs and
dogs with solar dermatitis and other dermatoses, Am
J Vet Res 57:178,1996.
37. Freidberg 1M, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine 5th ed. McGraw-Hill Book Co,
New York, 1999.
38. Gamy G: Cas clinique: Pyodermite des plis. Point Vet
18:411, 1986.
39. Georgi ME, et al: Pappus bristles: The cause of burdock stomatitis in dogs. Cornell Vet 72:43, 1982.
40. Gourley 1M, et al: Bum scar malignancy in a dog.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 180:109, 1982.
41. Gross TL: Calcinosis circumscripta and renal dysplasia in a dog. Vet Dennatol 8:27, 1997.
42. Harari J, et al: Recurrent peripheral arteriovenous
fistula and hyperthyroidism in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 20:759, 1984.
43. Hargis AM, et al: Myospherulosis in the subcutis of a
dog. Vet Pathol 21:248, 1984.
44. Hargis MM, Lewis TP 11: Full-thickness cutaneous
bum in black-haired skin on the dorsum of the body
of a Dalmatian puppy. Vet Pathol 10:39, 1999.
45. Hosgood G: Arteriovenous fistulas: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. Comp Cont Educ 11:625, 1989.
46. Hruza LL, Pentland AP: Mechanisms of UV-induced
inflammation. J Invest DennatoI100:35S, 1993.
47. Hubert BM: Porphyries: Cutaneous manifestations in
a cat and a dog. In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dennatology Ill. ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 461.
48. Hudelson S, Hudelson P: Pathophysiology of snake
envenomization and evaluation of treatments-Part I.
Comp Cont Ed 17:889, 1995.
49. Hudelson S, Hudelson P: Pathophysiology of snake
envenomization and evaluation of treatments-Part
11. Comp Cont Ed 17:1035, 1995.
50. Hudelson S" Hudelson P: Pathophysiology of snake
envenomization and evaluation of treatments-Part
Ill. Comp Cont Ed 17:1385, 1995.
51. Hudson WE, Florax MJH: Photosensitization in foxhounds. Vet Rec 128:618, 1991.
52. Hunt GB, Chapman BL: "Trophic" ulceration of two
digital pads. Aust Vet Pract 21:196, 1991.
53. Ihrke P: Nasal solar dermatitis. In: Kirk RW (ed):
Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1981, p 440.
54. Irving RA, et al: Porphyrin values and treatment of
feline solar dermatitis. Am J Vet Res 43:2067, 1982.
55. Israel E, et al: Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia in
a puppy: Grand Rounds Conference. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 14:521, 1978.
56. Iwasaki T, Maeda Y: The effect of ultraviolet (UV) on
the severity of canine pemphigus erythematosus. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol Am Coli
Vet Dennatol 13:86, 1997.
57. Jepson PGH.: Chilblain syndrome in dogs. Vet Rec
108:392, 1981.

I I 10 • Environmental Skin Diseases
58. Kanj LF, et aI: Pressure ulcers. J Am Acad Dermatol
38:517, 1998.
59. Kimura T, Doi K: Responses of the skin over the
dorsum to sunlight in hairless descendants of Mexican
hairless dogs. Am J Vet Res 55:199, 1994.
60. Kimura T, Doi K: Protective effects of sunscreens on
sunburn and suntan reactions in cross-bred Mexican
hairless dogs. Vet DermatoI5:175, 1994.
61. Knevitt R: Lip fold pyoderma. Cont Therap Series
187:829, 1995.
62. Komarek JV: Fallbericht: Verfolgung der Rute beim
Hund-Cauda-equina-syndrome. Kleintier-Prax 33:25,
1988.
63. Kostolich M: Reconstructive surgery of a snakebite
wound. Canine Pract 16:15, 1990.
64. Kraft W, et aI: Schlangenbisse bei Hunden. Tierarztl
Prax 26:104, 1998.
65. Kral, F., Schwartzman, R. M.: Veterinary and Comparative Dermatology. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia,1964.
66. Ledo E: Photodermatosis. Part I: Photobiology, photoimmunology, and idiopathic photodermatoses. Int J
Dermatol 32:387, 1993.
67. Ledo E: Photodermatoses. Part II: Chemical photodermatoses and dermatoses that can be exacerbated,
precipitated, or provoked by light. Int J Dermatol 32:
480,1993.
68. Lazarov A, et aI: Dermal spherulosis (myospherulosis)
after topical treatment for psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol 30(Part 1):265, 1994.
69. Little CJL, et aI: Hepatopathy and dermatitis in a dog
associated with the ingestion of mycotoxins. J Small
Anim Pract 32:23, 1991.
70. Mansfield PD: The management of snake venom poisoning in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 6:988, 1984.
71. Marks SL, et aI: Coral snake envenomation in the
dog: Report of four cases and review of the literature.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:629, 1990.
72. Marsella R, et aI: Use of pentoxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reaction to plants of the
Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8:121,
1997.
73. Mason BJE: Necrosis of a dog's toes following hepatitis. Vet Rec 101:286, 1977.
74. Mason K: Actinic dermatosis in dogs and cats. Proc
Annu Meet Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 12:67, 1997.
75. Mason KV: The pathogenesis of solar induced skin
lesions in bull terriers. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 4:12,
1987.
75a. Mason NJ, Michel KE: Subcutaneous emphysema,
pneumoperitoneum, and pneumoretroperitoneum after gastrostomy tube placement in a cat. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216:1096, 2000.
75b. McAlvany JP, Sherertz EF: Contact dermatitis in
infants, children, and adolescents. Adv Dermatol 9:
205,1994.
76. Messinger LM: Treatment of skin fold dermatitis affecting a eat's perineal urethrostomy site. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 30:341, 1994.
77. Miller WH Jr: Epidermal dysplastic disorders of dogs
and cats. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1995.
78. Miller WJ [r, Scott DW: Unpublished observations,
1999.
79. Mills BC: Feline deaths following tattooing with In-

dian ink. Univ Sydney Post-Grad Comm Vet Sci Control Therapy 134:2355, 1987.
80. Mirtschin PJ, et aI: Snake bites recorded by veterinary practices in Australia. Aust Vet J 76:195, 1998.
81. Mulcahy J, Rand J: Oral and dermal ulceration in a
cat exposed to a quaternary ammonium compound.
Aust Vet Pract 26:194, 1996.
82. Muller GH: Contact dermatitis in animals. Arch Dermatol 96:423, 1967.
83. Muller GH, et aI: Small Animal Dermatology IV.
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989.
84. Nagata M, et aI: Cryoglobulinaemia and cryofibrinogenaemia: A comparison of canine and human cases.
Vet Dermatol 9:277, 1998.
85. Neiger RD: Arsenic poisoning. In: Kirk RW (ed).
Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1989, p 159.
86. Nikula KJ, et ai: Ultraviolet radiation, solar dermatoses, and cutaneous neoplasia in beagle dogs. Radiat
Res 129:11, 1992.
87. Osweiler GD, et aI: Clinical and Diagnostic Veterinary Toxicology, 3rd ed. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co,
Dubuque, lA, 1985.
88. Paradis M, Scott DW: Calcinosis cutis secondary to
percutaneous penetration of calcium carbonate in a
Dalmatian. Can Vet J 30:57, 1989.
89. Patterson JM: Nasal solar dermatitis in the dog-a
method of tattooing. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:370,
1978.
90. Patterson JW, Kannon GA: Spherulocystic disease
("myospherulosis") arising in a lesion of steatocystoma
multiplex. J Am Acad DermatoI38:274, 1998.
91. Peterson ME, Meerdink GL: Bites and stings of venomous animals. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary
Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989,
p 177.
92. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: The use of synthetic retinoids in
veterinary medicine. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co,
Philadelphia, 1995.
93. Purkayastha SS, et aI: Efficacy of pentoxifylline with
aspirin in the treatment of frostbite. Indian J Med
Res 107:239, 1998.
94. Reedy LM, Clubb FJ: Microwave bum in a Toy Poodle: A case report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:497,
1991.
95. Reinke SI, et aI: Histopathologic features of pyotraumatic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:57,
1987.
95a. Rietschel RL: Irritant contact dermatitis. Mechanisms in irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 15:
557, 1997.
96. Rosenkrantz WS: Solar dermatitis. In: Griffin CE, et
aI: Current Veterinary Dermatology. Mosby-Year
Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 309.
97. Saxon WD, Kirby R: Treatment of acute bum injury
and smoke inhalation. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD
(eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1992, p 146.
98. Schaer M: Eastern diamondback rattlesnake envenomation of 20 dogs. Comp Cont Educ 6:997, 1984.
99. Schick MP, et al: Calcinosis cutis secondary to percutaneous penetration of calcium chloride in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 190:207, 1987.
100. Schroeder H, et al: Efficacy of a topical antimicrobial-anti-inflammatory combination in the treatment
of pyotraumatic dermatitis in dogs. Vet Dermatol 7:
163, 1996.

Environmental Skin Diseases • I I I I
101. Schwartzman RM, Kirschbaum JO: The cutaneous
histopathology of thallium poisoning. J Invest Dermatol 39:169, 1962.
102. Scott DW: Feline dermatology, 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
103. Shakespeare AC, et al: Infarction of the digits and tail
secondary to disseminated intravascular coagulation
and metastic hemangiosarcoma in a dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 24:517, 1988.
104. Springer TR, Bailey WJ: Snake bite treatment in the
United States. Int J Dermatol 25:479, 1986.
105. Streilein JW: Sunlight and skin-associated lymphoid
tissues (SALT). J Invest DermatoI100:47S, 1993.
106. Swaim SF, et al: Heating pad and thermal bums in
small animals. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:156, 1989.
107. Swain SF, et al: Pressure wounds in animals. Comp
Cont Ed 18:203, 1996.
108. Tennant BC: Lessons from the porphyrias of animals.
Clin Dermatol 16:307, 1998.

109. Thomas ML, et al: Chronic thallium toxicosis in a
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:211, 1993.
110. Trower ND, et al: Arteriovenous fistula involving the
prepuce of a dog. J Small Anim Pract 38:455, 1997.
111. Tur E, et al: Topical hydrogen peroxide treatment of
ischemic ulcers in the guinea pig: Blood recruitment
in multiple skin sites. J Am Acad Dermatol 33:217,
1995.
112. Vedros NA, Steinberg K: In vitro and in vivo activity
of plant extracts for use on canine pyotraumatic dermatitis. Canine Pract 19:8, 1994.
113. Walder EJ, Conroy JD: Contact dermatitis in dogs
and cats: Pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental
induction, and case reports. Vet Dermatol 5:149,
1994.
114. Waldman JS, et al: Subcutaneous myospherulosis.
JAm Acad DermatoI21:400, 1989.
115. Water CB, et aI: Acute thallium toxicosis in a dog.
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 201:883, 1992.

Chapter

17
Nutritional Skin Diseases

D

ermatoses may result from numerous nutritional deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances, but the skin responds with only a few types of clinical reactions and lesions.
These include scaling, crusting, alopecia, comedones, erythema, and a dry, dull or greasy
haircoat. Consequently, physical examinations alone can seldom reveal a specific nutritional cause.
It is useful to know the nutritional requirements of dogs and cats!' 26 but it is difficult
to prove that a specific deficiency causes a specific skin disease. Since the 1980s, a few
new skin diseases were described that were definitely connected to nutritional factors, and
it became fashionable to name them in terms of their response to a nutrient rather than
in terms of a deficiency. Notable examples of these are the zinc-responsive dermatoses
and the vitamin A-responsive dermatoses (rather than zinc deficiency and vitamin A
deficiency). In many instances, these entities may represent genetically related inabilities
to absorb or metabolize the nutrients rather than true nutritional deficiencies; in others,
the response obtained may be the result of presently unknown effects of supraphysiologic
doses of the nutrients.
Major nutritional problems of concern are deficiencies of essential fatty acids, protein,
the minerals zinc and copper, and vitamins A, B, and E, as well as excessive levels of
vitamin A.25 Food hypersensitivity may also produce dermatoses (see Chap. 8).

• FATTY ACID DEFICIENCY
Fatty acid deficiency is uncommon to rare and is seen only in animals that are fed dry
rations, commercial food that has been poorly preserved (storage, temperature, preservative problems), or homemade foods. I, 16,26,37 A deficiency may occur because fat was left
out of the food to save costs, because it leaked from the bag during storage, or because it
became rancid. Fatty acid deficiency also may occur from diets that contain fat but have
inadequate antioxidants, such as vitamin E. Signs of fatty acid deficiency can be seen in
dogs that are fed high-quality reducing dog foods in which the fat content has been
lowered.
Dog food should have a minimum of 3% fat in canned food and 7% to 8% fat in dry
food. Cats usually have 35% to 40% of their calories provided by fat-a much higher
amount-because they need a dense caloric formula. The oxidation of fat during storage
is a great concern because when fat becomes rancid, the essential fatty acids as well as
vitamins D, E, and biotin are destroyed. Oxidation may occur in canned food after 1 year
and in dry food after 6 months, especially if the food is stored at high temperatures.
Animals may also develop fatty acid deficiency in association with intestinal malabsorption,
pancreatic disease, and chronic hepatic disease.
Animals must be on a diet deficient in essential fatty acids for several months before
skin problems become evident." There is an early decrease in lipid production with
resultant fine scaling of the skin and loss of the luster and sheen of the hair (Fig. 17-lA).

"See references 6, 13, 14, 16, 26, 38, 39.

1112

Nutritional Skin Diseases • II 13

This dry phase can last for months and can have associated hair loss and secondary
bacterial infections. Eventually, the skin thickens and becomes greasy, especially in the
ears, in the intertriginous areas, and between the toes. The dryness of the coat is replaced
by greasiness, and many animals become pruritic. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia
infections can occur, with intensification of the seborrheic changes and pruritus.
Fatty acid deficiency in a number of species produces abnormal keratinization, resulting in epidermal hyperplasia, hypergranulosis, and orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis (Fig. 17-2). This abnormal keratinization is thought to result from arachidonic
acid deficiency with resultant prostaglandin E deficiency, which causes aberrations in the
ratios of epidermal cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP) to cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cyclic GMP) and in DNA synthesis.
The polyunsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid is essential in the diet of all animals.
Arachidonic and linolenic acids are also required; however, with the exception of arachidonic acid in the cat, these acids can be synthesized from linoleic acid. Cats seems to lack
an active d-6-desaturase to initiate the conversion of linoleic acid to arachidonic acid and
thus are obligate carnivores. 1. 16.27
Therapy produces visible responses after 3 to 8 weeks of fatty acid supplementation if
the dermatosis is indeed an essential fatty acid deficiency. In such cases, the coats may
develop more luster. Fatty acid deficiency can be corrected by changing the dog's ration
to one of higher quality and fat content, through the administration of various veterinary
fatty acid supplements, or by the addition of household fats to the diet. Because fat
supplements have a high caloric density, might trigger an episode of pancreatitis in a
predisposed dog, and need to be supplemented with at least vitamin E, this old route of
treatment is no longer used routinely.
It is more beneficial to upgrade the basic diet or to use balanced nutritional supplements. If the fatty acid deficiency is compounded by intercurrent vitamin or mineral
imbalances, household supplements will not correct them and may aggravate a vitamin E
deficiency. Most prescription supplements contain all the necessary vitamins and minerals
for the skin in addition to the essential fatty acids. Although most supplements are
reasonably priced, the cost of using them continually in a normal dog or cat usually
exceeds the cost of a better quality pet food.
Excessive fat supplementation is contraindicated in cases in which the fatty acid
deficiency is intentional, such as in the management of obesity, pancreatic disease, or
hyperlipidemia disorders. In these cases, treatment with balanced omega-6 and omega-3
fatty acid supplements (Derm Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals; EFA Caps, Virbac: Efa Vet,
Efamol Vet) may be of some benefit.P These supplements contain linoleic acid plus the
marine lipids, eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acid. They are thought to modulate
arachidonic acid metabolism with the production of various leukotrienes and prostaglandins, which can alter the inflammatory cascade and epidermal proliferation." These products have received the most attention in the treatment of allergic disorders (see Chaps. 3
and 8), but those reports indicate that improvement in coat quality also occurs with their
use. It is unknown whether the improvement is due to the modulation of epidermal
proliferation or to some other mechanism. The products supply high-quality fats in small
volumes with low caloric density (fewer than 5 calories for every 9.1 kg of body weight);
therefore, their use in obese animals should not Significantly slow the weight loss. No data
are available on the safety and efficacy of these supplements in dogs with pancreatitis or
other disorders of lipid metabolism. The authors are aware of cases of flare-ups in
pancreatitis when the full recommended dosage was initiated suddenly; with gradual
introduction over 2 weeks, however, some dogs with pancreatitis have been able to
tolerate the supplement.
When dietary fat supplementation is impossible, topical application of essential fatty
acids may be of some benefit. Studies in mice have shown that topically applied fats can
correct the cutaneous changes of fatty acid deficiency.P No data are available to support
or refute this mechanism in dogs. Some of these dogs do very well when bathed with
shampoos containing fatty acids (e.g., HyLyt"efa, DVM Pharmaceuticals) or rinsed with
after-bath products containing fatty acids (e.g., Alpha-Sesame Oil-V Rx). The response

1114 • Nutritional Skin Diseases

FIGURE 17-1. Legend on opposite page

Nutritional Skin Diseases • I I 15

FIGURE 17-2. Essential fatty
acid deficiency in a dog. Epidermal
and follicular hyperplasia with a
mild, mononuclear perivascular dermatitis.

seen in these animals may be due to mechanisms other than transepidermal fat absorption.
Fatty acid deficiency responds gradually to supplementation. Mild cases should return
to normal in 4 to 8 weeks, but severe cases can take up to 6 months. Shampooing with
antiseborrheic products hastens the clinical improvement, but these products should be
used only when absolutely necessary. There is no specific laboratory test for fatty acid
deficiency; the diagnosis is confirmed by response to treatment. If seborrheic changes are
controlled by bathing, it may be impossible to determine whether the supplementation is
of any benefit.

• PROTEIN DEFICIENCY
Protein deficiency may be produced by inanition, starvation, feeding kittens commercial
dog food, or feeding dogs special or very low-protein diets. Many commercial pet foods
are actually extremely high in protein; as a result, protein deficiency is rare.
Hair is 95% protein with a high percentage of amino acids that contain sulfur. The
normal growth of hair (the sum of growth in all follicles of the dog being 100 feet per
day) and the keratinization of skin require 25% to 30% of the animal's daily protein
requirement.l" 26, 27 Animals with protein deficiency have hyperkeratosis, epidermal hyperpigmentation, and loss of hair pigment. There is patchy alopecia in which hairs become
thinner, rough, dry, dull, and brittle. They are easily broken and grow slowly; shedding is
prolonged. These lesions, together with scales and crusts, may appear symmetrically on
the head, back, thorax, and abdomen, and on the feet and legs. Lesions are more
prominent in young, growing dogs whose protein requirements are higher. Because adequate protein is needed for wound healing, there is a high rate of wound dehiscence in
protein-depleted dogs.33 , 44 In humans, a mean hair root diameter of less than 0.06 mm
suggests protein deficiency, but no similar specifications are available for animals. An

FIGURE 17-1. A, Fatty acid deficiency in a dog. Dull, dry, brittle haircoat and diffuse scaling. B, Vitamin A deficiency
in a dog. Marked follicular hyperkeratosis and follicular casts. C, Vitamin E deficiency in a dog. Marked exfoliative
erythroderma on the pinna. D, Zinc-responsive dermatosis. Facial crusting. E, Same dog as in D, Severe erythema
underlying crusts. F, Same dog as in D and E. Erythematous, crusted pinna. G, Same dog as in D, E, and F. Hyperkeratosis of footpads. H, Generic dog food dermatosis. Hyperkeratotic, crusted plaques with peripheral erythemas in a mucocutaneous distribution. (Courtesy of P. Ihrke.)

1116 • Nutritional Skin Diseases

analysis of the diet and the provision of protein on a dry matter basis (25% for dogs and
33% for cats) should be therapeutic. High-quality protein from eggs, meat, or milk is
important in supplementation.

• VITAMIN DEFICIENCIES

Vitamin A
This vitamin functions to maintain healthy skin and epithelial cells; therefore, deficiency
and toxicity signs, which are similar, are manifested cutaneously.I" 26. 27, 37 There is hyperkeratinization of the epithelial surfaces. Hyperkeratosis occurs in the sebaceous glands,
occluding their ducts and blocking secretion. Localized or generalized firm papular eruptions with a firm center are formed. A poor coat, alopecia, scaling of the skin, and an
increased susceptibility to bacterial infection are also observed. Wound healing is impaired." A single injection of 6000 IV aqueous vitamin A solution per kg of body weight
is adequate therapy for a serious deficiency.
True vitamin A deficiency has been recognized in a mongrel dog." The dog had
severe seborrheic skin lesions, nyctalopia, and diarrhea since puppyhood. The skin was
thickened, hyperpigmented, and alopecic, with marked follicular hyperkeratosis (see Fig.
17 -IB). Antiseborrheic shampoos were of no benefit, and the dog responded only partially to low-dose supplementation of vitamin A.
Because vitamin A is stored so well, toxicity may be of greater concern than deficiency. There is real danger of oversupplementation or toxicity from excess liver in the
diet. A level 30 times the requirement for 2 to 3 months can produce toxicity. The dosage
of retinol for dogs and cats should not exceed 400 IV/kg/day orally. Retinoids are derivatives of retinol with an increased therapeutic index but decreased toxicity." In human
medicine, they are used in skin cancer, photoaging, acne, lichen planus, discoid lupus
erythematosus, and disorders of keratinization, In veterinary dermatology, isotretinoin and
etretinate have received widest use in disorders of keratinization. Both of these agents are
safe in dogs and cats, but their expense precluded prolonged use in most cases. Etretinate
is no longer marketed and has been replaced by one of its major metabolites, acitretin.
The new product is of unproven efficacy in animals but is so expensive that it will
probably receive little use. The high cost of the retinoids has prompted some to return to
treatment with retinol. These animals should be monitored carefully for signs of intoxication.
Hypervitaminosis A is best described in cats fed large amounts of liver.22 Among their
other signs, these cats have disheveled, seborrheic coats probably as a result of their
inability to groom themselves properly. Reports of this condition in dogs are rare. 22• 41
Affected dogs show pain when manipulated owing to vertebral changes, and they have
seborrheic skin lesions identical to those seen in animals with hypovitaminosis A or
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis.

Vitamin A-Responsive Dermatosis
Some cases of severe seborrhea in Cocker spaniels and several other breeds have responded to vitamin A supplementation'? and are discussed in detail in Chapter 14.

Vitamin D
Vitamin D is produced in the skin and has its major impact in calcium homeostasis.
Naturally occurring excess or deficiency has not been reported in animals. In addition to
its role in calcium homeostasis, 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D 3 impacts keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation. 3. 15, 21 With this activity, various topical or systemic analogs are
being investigated in the treatment of psoriasis. Because primary seborrhea (see Chap. 12)
is a hyperproliferative disorder, vitamin D analogs are being studied in dogs.

Nutritional Skin Diseases • 1 117

Vitamin E
Vitamin E, selenium, and fatty acids have a balanced relationship. Experimental vitamin E
deficiency in dogs also results in severe suppression of in vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis.>'
In cats, a similar imbalance produces pansteatitis.!" 20, 37 This syndrome results when highfat foods, such as canned red tuna, are fed almost exclusively. If food processing or fat
oxidation has inactivated the vitamin E, the imbalance results. Cats show pain on gentle
palpation and are anorectic, lethargic, and irritable. They may die in several weeks. There
are large, firm lumps in the subcutaneous tissues and abdominal cavity. Diagnosis can be
made at biopsy or autopsy by finding yellow fat and steatitis. Biopsy reveals lobular
panniculitis and ceroid within lipocytes, macrophages, and giant cells (Fig. 17-3). Ceroid
is a pink to yellow homogenous material on H & E stain and is deep crimson on acid-fast
stain.
Naturally occurring vitamin E deficiency has not been reported in dogs, but experimentally induced vitamin E deficiency has been studied.v' Researchers showed that skin
lesions can be produced. They consisted of an early keratinization defect (seborrhea sicca),
and a later greasy and inflammatory stage (erythroderma and seborrhea oleosa) (see Fig.
17-Ie); in addition, the dogs tended to develop secondary bacterial pyoderma. The
dermatohistopathologic findings in dogs with experimentally produced vitamin E deficiency are nondiagnostic. Morphologically, the findings are characterized by hyperplastic
superficial perivascular dermatitis (Fig. 17-4). This is a common reaction pattern in
canine skin, one most commonly seen in hypersensitivity reactions, ectoparasitisms, and
seborrheic disorders. When the experimental dogs that had been fed a vitamin Edeficient diet were provided a vitamin E supplement equal to or double the National
Research Council recommendations, the dermatosis responded dramatically. The erythema
and greasiness subsided within 3 to 6 weeks, and the scaling resolved within 8 to 10
weeks.
Vitamin E deficiency induces T cell dysfunction in dogs and has been associated as a
causal factor in generalized demodicosis in dogs. 9 , 10 Research has not been able to
substantiate this claim. Megadose vitamin supplementation, although of some probable
benefit, has not been curative.P
Vitamin E is an antioxidant, stabilizes lysosomes, reduces prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 )
synthesis, and increases interleukin 2 (IL-2) production with resultant anti-inflammatory
and immunostimulatory effects.l? Alone or in combination with vitamin A where it has
synergistic effects, it has been used to treat dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, discoid lupus
erythematosus, granuloma annulare, or benign familial pemphigus in humans. In dogs,
some cases of discoid lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, or acanthosis nigricans re-

FIGURE 17-3. Steatitis in a cat.
Pyogranulomatous, lobular panniculitis. Amorphous material (arrows) is
ceroid.

1118 • Nutritional Skin Diseases

FIGURE 17-4. Experimental vitamin E deficiency in a dog. Epidermal and follicular hyperplasia is the
most marked feature and mimics
that seen in essential fatty acid deficiency (see Fig. 17-2).

spond to treatment with vitamin E.41 It is unlikely that vitamin E deficiency would occur
in dogs on commercial diets. It would enter into the differential diagnosis of a dog with
seborrhea or erythroderma. Diagnosis would be based on dietary history, physical examination, the ruling out of more common canine dermatoses, compatible skin biopsy results,
and response to vitamin E therapy.
Vitamin E, d- and a-tocopherol being the most biologically active form, is used in
doses of 10 mg (13.5 IU)lkglday as an antioxidant and for the therapy of pansteatitis in
cats (resulting from excess tuna or fat in the diet). In severe cases, it is mandatory to use
systemic corticosteroids during the painful period of treatment (2 to 3 weeksi.'? Vitamin E
in doses of 400 to 800 IV q12h has been used successfully in discoid lupus erythematosus
and systemic lupus erythematosus, and in disorders involving the basement membrane
zone.

Vitamin B
B-complex vitamins are considered as a group because deficiencies of single B vitamins
are very rare and the clinical syndromes are similar.l" 26, 27 These vitamins are synthesized
by intestinal bacteria; because they are water soluble and not stored, a constant supply is
needed, and toxicities do not occur. It is possible for biotin, riboflavin, niacin, and
pyridoxine deficiencies to have clinical ramifications,
Biotin can be inactivated by feeding the animal a diet high in uncooked eggs. 16 , 26, 27
The whites contain avidin, which binds biotin so that it cannot be absorbed, Biotin
deficiency can also result from prolonged oral antibiotic therapy, The most striking sign is
a "spectacle eye" of alopecia around the face and eyes, Biotin deficiency should be
differentiated from demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and other facial dermatoses (discoid
lupus erythematosus, pemphigus, dermatomyositis, epidermolysis bullosa). In severe cases,
crusted lesions of the face, neck, body, and legs are present. There may also be lethargy,
emaciation, and diarrhea. Biotin deficiency has been shown to cause a widespread papulocrustous dermatitis in cats."
Riboflavin deficiency may produce a dry, flaky dermatitis (seborrhea), especially
around the eyes and ventrum; the outstanding sign, however, is cheilosis.t" 27 The deficiency also produces alopecia on the head of cats.!" Riboflavin deficiency is all but
impossible if any meat or dairy products are present in the diet.
Niacin deficiency is manifested as pellagra and is characterized by ulcerated mucous
membranes, diarrhea, and emaciation. It may produce a pruritic dermatitis of the rear legs
and abdomen. 26 • 27 For a deficiency to be produced, the diet must be low in animal

Nutritional Skin Diseases • 1119
protein and high in com. Com and all cereals are low in tryptophan, which is converted
to niacin by all animals except cats. Commercial pet foods contain more than enough
niacin; therefore, supplementation is not needed.
Pyridoxine deficiency, produced experimentally in cats, causes a dull, waxy, unkempt
haircoat with generalized and fine white scales." In some experimental cats, it caused
multiple areas of alopecia in the temporal and periauricular area, on the dorsum of the
muzzle, periorally, and on the extremities. When these experimental pyridoxine-deficient
cats were fed a balanced diet, all of the skin lesions resolved. This condition has not been
observed clinically and remains a laboratory phenomenon.
The most common signs of B-complex deficiencies are a dry, flaky seborrhea with
alopecia, anorexia, and weight loss. Effective treatment consists of brewer's yeast, Bcomplex injections, or both. Supplementation may be needed only if the animals are
anorectic or have problems that cause excess water turnover.
When 119 dogs with dull coat, brittle hair, loss of hair, scaly skin, pruritus, or
dermatitis were given biotin (0.5 mgllO kg body weight/day) for 3 to 5 weeks, 108 (91%)
were cured or improved significantly.ll Insufficient data were supplied to determine
whether these dogs were truly deficient in biotin or responded by some other therapeutic
effect. This report highlights the need for broad-based vitamin supplementation when a
nutritional deficiency is suspected or when fatty acids are added to a seborrheic dog's diet.

• MINERAL IMBALANCES
Zinc, copper, and calcium are three minerals that influence iodine metabolism and each
other; abnormal levels of anyone of them may be reflected in the skin. Because of the
great variation among individuals, only one or several of a group of animals may develop
lesions, even though all have been fed and managed alike.
Copper defiCiency should appear as a balance problem only if excess zinc is added to
the diet. 26 , 27 Copper is needed by enzymes that convert L-tyrosine to melanin and by the
follicular cells in the conversion of prekeratin to keratin. A deficiency is manifested by
hypopigmentation and faulty keratinization of the skin and hair follicles, with the hair
becoming dull and rough. Because commercial pet foods have adequate copper levels,
supplements are not needed. Bull terriers with lethal acrodermatitis, a zinc deficiency
disorder, are also copper deficient.v Dogs with zinc-responsive disorders may also have
irregularities in their copper balance.

• ZINC-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS
Zinc is an important cofactor and modulator of many critical biological functions.Pv 34
Although zinc deficiency was thought to play a role in many dermatoses of the dog, recent
work2B indicates that zinc deficiency is rare in the dog. Zinc deficiency has been documented in Bull terriers with acrodermatitis (see Chap. 12), and relative or absolute
deficiency is suspected in two other dermatologic syndromes.v 23. 32
Syndrome I occurs in Siberian huskies and Alaskan malamutes primarily, but Bull
terriers may also be affected. 23 • 2B Although a familial history is lacking in many cases, the
striking breed predilection strongly supports a genetic linkage and affected dogs should
not be used for breeding." Skin lesions in these breeds develop despite well-balanced diets
with sufficient zinc. Lesions develop early in adulthood (at 1 to 3 years of age) and
progress at a variable rate. Most dogs develop their lesions in September through January.? Over one-half of the dogs have lesional pruritus, and pruritus in "normal" skin can be
the hallmark of a pending relapse during maintenance. There is early erythema followed
by alopecia, crusting, scaling, and underlying suppuration around the mouth, chin, eyes,
and ears (see Fig. 17-1D to F). Other body openings and the scrotum, prepuce, and
vulva may be affected. Although the coat is dull, there is excess sebum production. Thick
crusts may appear on the elbows and other pressure points. The skin may be inelastic and

1120 • Nutritional Skin Diseases

the legs stiff, as a result of hardened crusts. Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections
are common, especially when there is pruritus. The footpads may become hyperkeratotic
(see Fig. 17-IG), and claw disease, especially onychomalacia, may be observed.Ps In
chronic cases, hyperpigmentation occurs in the area of the lesions. There may be a
decreased sense of smell (hyposmia) and taste (hypogeusia). Clinical signs may be precipitated or intensified by stress and estrus.
It has been shown that malamutes have a genetic defect of decreased capability for
zinc absorption from the intestines.F' 27 In some Siberian huskies, hypothyroidism and a
decreased serum zinc level have been reported, but the significance of these conditions is
unknown.F' Dogs on high-calcium or high-cereal diets, which have high levels of phytate,
show poor zinc absorption, owing to binding of the zinc. High levels of iron-occasionally
found in well water or the water in houses with old plumbing- may interfere with zinc
absorption. Prolonged enteritis and diarrhea also prevent normal absorption. A severe
deficiency may cause poor growth and weight loss in young puppies and poor wound
healing in any animal. 35 , 36
Syndrome II occurs in rapidly growing puppies or young adult dogs that are fed zincdeficient diets, diets high in phytates or minerals such as calcium (which interfere with
zinc absorption), or diets that are oversupplemented with minerals and vitamins. Many
breeds may be abnormal, but Great Danes, Doberman pinschers, Beagles, German shepherds, German shorthaired pointers, Labrador retrievers, Rhodesian ridgebacks, and standard Poodles have been reported.v 17,23,32,46 The severity of lesions can vary greatly within
a litter. Some animals may be normal, whereas others are stunted, depressed, and anorectic. The skin lesions are hyperkeratotic plaques over areas of repeated trauma or where
calluses might normally occur. The footpads and nasal planum may be affected, and any
thickened area may have deep fissures. There may be secondary infection of the crusts
and an associated lymphadenopathy. Severely affected dogs can look as though they have
canine distemper.
In both syndromes, serum or hair zinc levels may be abnormal. Proper analysis for
zinc is difficult and can be unreliable, however, because samples may be contaminated by
zinc in glassware or rubber stoppers, and by the influences of various environmental,
physiologic, and disease-related factors. 28, 46. 49
Diagnosis may be made by history taking, physical examination, and skin biopsy,
Hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis, with marked diffuse and follicular parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, is suggestive of zinc deficiency (Figs. 17-5 and 17-6). Papillomatosis and mild diffuse spongiosis are also common findings. Eosinophils and lymphocytes are
often prominent in the perivascular cellular infiltrate. Intraepidermal pustular dermatitis
and suppurative folliculitis reflect secondary bacterial infection. Histologic features of
secondary Malassezia infection may be present (see Chap. 5).
Treatment involves the inspection and correction of any inadequacy in the diet,
including the base diet, water, and any treats or supplements given to the animal.
Secondary bacterial or Malassezia infections must be appropriately treated. In Syndrome
II, dietary adjustments alone can resolve the skin lesions in 2 to 6 weeks. Zinc supplementation is necessary in Syndrome I and can hasten the animal's response in Syndrome II. In
the latter case, the supplement need be given for only a few weeks to restore the zinc
stores in the animal. In Syndrome I, approximately 25% of dogs can have the zinc
supplementation stopped without an immediate relapse in the condition. For the remainder, supplementation must be lifelong but the dosage may have to be adjusted.
Oral zinc supplementation at a dose of 1 mg of elemental zinc/kg/day should be
sufficient for most dogs." Zinc sulfate (10 mglkglday), zinc gluconate (5 mglkglday), or
zinc methionine (1.7 mglkglday) are commonly used preparations. If zinc sulfate is used,
the tablets should be crushed and mixed with food to enhance absorption and decrease
gastric irritation. In Syndrome II, the supplement can be withdrawn when the skin has
returned to normal, if the nutritional problem has been corrected. In Syndrome I, zinc
administration typically is lifelong. If little or no response is seen within 4 weeks of
initiating treatment, the dosage should be increased by 50%. In both syndromes, existing
skin lesions can be improved by hydrating the crusts with wet dressings or whole-body

Nutritional Skin Diseases • I 121

FIGURE 17-5. Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Siberian husky. Hyperplastic perivascular
dermatitis with marked diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

warm water soakings for 5 to 10 minutes and then bathing the animal with an antiseborrheic shampoo. Lesions on the face and elsewhere improve with the application of
petrolatum or an ointment-based topical agent. Topical agents are less messy, and the
active ingredient-an antibiotic or keratolytic agent-provides additional benefits. Once
the dog returns to normal, it is not unusual to be able to decrease the dosage of zinc,
especially in the warm months. Relapses during the cool months or later in life may occur
but should respond to dosage increase.
Some dogs, especially Siberian huskies, do not respond to oral zinc supplementation.
Intravenous injection with sterile zinc sulfate solutions at dosages of 10 to 15 mglkg has
been effective.f? Weekly injections for at least 4 weeks are necessary to resolve the
lesions, and maintenance injections every 1 to 6 months are necessary to prevent relapses.

FIGURE 17-6. Close-up of Figure 17-5. Papillomatosis and diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis that
also involves hair follicles.

1122 • Nutritional Skin Diseases

Intravenous treatment is expensive and cardiac arrhythmias can occur if the drug is
administered too fast. A recent study documents the place of low-dose corticosteroids in
the treatment of dogs who do not respond to zinc alone." Corticosteroids are known to
increase zinc absorbtion from the gastrointestinal tract by induction of metallothionein,
but they may also have some direct effect on the skin in these dogs. In these dogs,
discontinuation of the corticosteroid lowers the serum zinc levels and results in a clinical
relapse. Some dogs seem to respond better to zinc when they are also treated with
omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids.
In kittens, dietary zinc deficiency was reported to cause thinning of the haircoat, slow
hair growth, scaly skin, and ulceration of the buccal margins. i S The eat's requirement for
dietary zinc was estimated at between 15 and 50 ppm.

• GENERIC DOG FOOD SKIN DISEASE
Dogs fed only generic dog foods marketed in the late 1980s developed bilateral symmetric
scaling and crusting dermatoses.w 46 The lesions developed within a month of eating the
food and involved the bridge of the nose, mucocutaneous junctions, pressure points, and
distal extremities (see Fig. 17 -IH). Well-demarcated, older lesions had erythematous
borders with scales, crusts, and variable hyperpigmentation and lichenification. A few dogs
had alopecia, focal erosions, papules, and pustules; most had fever, depression, lymphadenopathy, and pitting edema of dependent areas.
Skin biopsies showed hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis with diffuse parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, prominent focal keratinocyte apoptosis, and a mixed dermal
cellular infiltrate (Fig. 17-7). Although the clinical and histopathologic findings are similar
to those seen in the zinc-responsive dermatoses, the acuteness of onset and the frequent
occurrence of systemic illness suggest that other nutritional imbalances may playa role.
The differential diagnosis should include relative or absolute zinc deficiency, immunemediated skin diseases (especially pemphigus foliaceus and systemic lupus erythematosus),
staphylococcal folliculitis, and necrolytic migratory erythema. Treatment with antibiotics or
corticosteroids was unsuccessful, but rapid response occurred 1 week after simply chang-

FIGURE 17-7. Generic dog food dermatosis. Multiple apoptotic keratinocytes.

Nutritional Skin Diseases • I 123
ing the dogs' diet to a national brand of dog food that met National Research Council
requirements.
Since the original reports on this disorder, no additional cases have been reported.
Improvements in the formulation of generic pet foods must have been made, because
they are still marketed.

• NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS
Pets that are fed high-quality commercial foods typically receive no benefits from additional supplements. When disease results from the animal eating low-quality food or from
inherent metabolic defects that alter the digestion or absorption of one or more nutrients,
one can choose to supplement the existing diet or upgrade the base diet with a higher
quality food. It is more appropriate and cost effective to upgrade the base diet because all
nutrients should be in the correct proportion. If the owners are reluctant to change foods
without absolute proof of the benefit of doing so, or if the animal refuses to eat anything
different, a supplement proposed by Lewis can be beneficial.P" 27 For every 9 to 14 kg of
body weight, the dog should be given 1 teaspoon (5 ml) of com oil or safflower oil, 2
ounces (56 g) of cooked liver, 100 mg of zinc sulfate, and 1 drop of tincture of iodine.
Most owners find it convenient to make large batches of the supplement. Problems with
thorough mixing of the ingredients and giving the dog the correct amount can be overcome by making a puree of the mixture in a blender and freezing the supplement in ice
cube trays. At each meal, the owner can thaw the appropriate number of cubes and add
them to the diet. Because this supplement provides fat, protein, vitamins A and E, biotin,
riboflavin, niacin, iodine, and zinc, it should resolve all nutritional dermatoses unless they
have a genetic basis (e.g., Syndrome I zinc-responsive dermatoses) or are secondary to
severe gastrointestinal disorders. If no change is seen after 8 weeks of supplementation,
nutritional causes can be discounted; if a good response is seen, the supplement can be
continued or a new base diet can be selected.

• REFERENCES
1. Anderson RW (ed): Nutrition of the Dog and Cat:
Proceedings of an International Symposium. Elmsford,
New York, Pergamon Press, 1980, p 67.
2. Bensignor E: Dermatose amelioree par Ie zinc chez un
caniche. Point Vet 28:741, 1996.
3. Bikle DD: Vitamin D: A calciotropic hormone regulating calcium-induced keratinocyte differentiation. J Am
Acad Dermatol 37:S42, 1997.
4. Burton G, Mason KV: The possible role of prednisolone in "zinc-responsive dermatosis" in the Siberian
husky. Aust Vet Pract 28:20, 1998.
5. Campbell KL: Fatty acid supplementation and skin
disease. Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 20:
1475, 1990.
6. Campbell KL, et al: Effects of animal and soy fats and
proteins in the diet on fatty acid concentrations in the
serum and skin of dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:1465, 1995.
7. Colombini S, Dunstan RW: Zinc-responsive dermatosis
in northern-breed dogs: 17 cases (1990-1996). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 2Il:451, 1997.
8. Fadok VA: Nutritional therapy in veterinary dermatology. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX.
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 591.
9. Figueiredo C: Vitamin E serum contents, erythrocyte
and lymphocyte counts, PCV and Hg determination in
normal dogs, dogs with scabies, and dogs with demodicosis. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol
1:1, 1985.

10. Figueiredo C, et al: Clinical evaluation of the effect of
vitamin E in the treatment of generalized canine demodicosis. Adv Vet Dermatol 2:247, 1993.
11. Frigg M, et al: Clinical study on the effect of biotin on
skin conditions in dogs. Schweiz Arch Tierheilk 131:
621, 1989.
12. Gilbert PA, et al: Serum vitamin E levels in dogs with
pyoderma and generalized demodicosis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 28:407, 1992.
13. Hansen AE, Weise HF: Fat in the diet in relation to
nutrition of the dog. I. Characteristic appearance and
gross changes of animals fed diets with and without
fat. Tex Rep Bioi Med 52:205, 1951.
14. Hansen AE, Weise HF: Studies with dogs maintained
on diets low in fat. Proc Soc Exp Bioi Med 52:205,
1943.
15. Holick MF, et al: Clinical uses for calciotropic hormones 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 and parathyroid hormone-related peptide in dermatology: A new perspective. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 1:1, 1996.
16. Holzworth J: Diseases of the Cat: Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1987.
17. Ihrke PJ, Goldschmidt MH: Vitamin A-responsive
dermatosis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:687,
1983.
18. Kane E, et al: Zinc deficiency in the cat. J Nutr Ill:
488, 1981.
19. Keller KL, Fenske NA: Use of vitamins A, C, and E

I I 24 • Nutritional Skin Diseases
and related compounds in dermatology: A review. J
Am Acad DermatoI39:611, 1998.
20. Koutinas AF, et al: Pansteatitis (steatitis, "yellow fat
disease") in the cat: A review article and report of 4
spontaneous cases. Vet Dermatol 3:101, 1993.
21. Kragballe K: The future of vitamin D in dermatology.
J Am Acad Dermatol 37:S72, 1997.
22. Kronfeld DS: Vitamin and Mineral Supplementation
for Dogs and Cats. Veterinary Practice Publishing Co,
Santa Barbara, CA, 1989.
23. Kunkle CA: Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy Vll. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 472.
24. Langweiler M, et al: Effect of vitamin E deficiency on
the proliferative response of canine lymphocytes. Am J
Vet Res 42:1681, 1981.
25. Leibetseder J: Ernlihrungsbedingte Erkrankungen der
Haut bei Hund und Katze. Wien Tierarztl. Mschr 83:
19, 1998.
26. Lewis LD: Cutaneous manifestations of nutritional imbalances. Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 48:263, 1981.
27. Lewis LD, Morris ML Jr: Small Animal Clinical Nutrition, 2nd ed. Mark Morris Associates, Topeka, KS,
1984.
28. Logas DL, et al: Comparison of serum zinc levels in
healthy, systemically ill, and dermatologically diseased
dogs. Vet Dermatol 4:61, 1993.
28a. McEwan NA: Nail disease, zinc deficiency and lethal
acrodermatitis. Proc Brit Vet Dermatol Study Crp,
Spring 1999, p. 29.
29. Miller WH Jr: Nutritional considerations in small animal dermatology. Vet Clin North Am 19:497, 1989.
30. Norris D: Zinc and cutaneous inflammation, Arch Dermatol 121:985, 1985.
31. Norton A: Skin lesions seen in cats with vitamin B
(pyroxidine) deficiency. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 3:24, 1987.
32. Ohlen B, Scott DW: Zinc responsive dermatitis in puppies. Canine Pract 13:2, 1986.
33. Rhoads JE, et al: The mechanism of delayed wound

healing in the presence of hypoproteinemia. J Am Med
Assoc 118:21, 1942.
34. Russell RM, et al: Zinc and the special senses. Ann
Intern Med 99:227, 1983.
35. Sanecki RK, et al: Tissue changes in dogs fed a zincdeficient ration. Am J Vet Res 43:1642, 1982.
36. Sanecki RK, et al: Extracutaneous histologic changes
accompanying zinc deficiency in pups. Am J Vet Res
46:2119, 1985.
37. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:331, 1980.
38. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim. Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
39. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret
sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 23:255, 1987.
40. Scott DW, Sheffy BE: Dermatosis in dogs caused by
vitamin E deficiency. Comp Anim Pract 41:42, 1987.
41. Scott DW, et al: Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1995, p 891.
42. Sousa CA, et al: Dermatosis associated with feeding
generic dog food: 13 cases (1981-1982). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 192:676, 1988.
43, Sousa CA: Nutritional dermatoses. In: Nesbit CH (ed):
Dermatology: Contemporary Issues in Small Animal
Practice. Churchill Livingstone, Inc., New York, 1987.
44. Thompson W, et al: The effect of hypoproteinemia on
wound disruption. Arch Surg 26:500, 1938.
45. Uchida Y, et al: Serum concentrations of zinc and
copper in bull terriers with lethal acrodermatitis and
tail-chasing behavior. Am J Vet Res 8:808, 1997.
46. van den Broek AHM, Thoday KL: Skin disease in dogs
associated with zinc deficiency: A report of 5 cases. J
Small Anim Pract 27:313, 1986,
47. Willemse, T.: Zinc-responsive disorders of the dog, In:
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W,B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1992, p 532.
48. Wolf AM: Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Rhodesian
ridgeback. Vet Med 80:37, 1985.
49. Wright RP: Identification of zinc-responsive dermatoses. Vet Med 80:37, 1985.

Chapter

18
Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

• CANINE SUBCORNEAL PUSTULAR DERMATOSIS
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis is a very rare, idiopathic, sterile, superficial pustular dermatosis of dogs.3 , 8, 9

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause of subcorneal pustular dermatosis is unknown. In humans, it has been postulated that immunologic mechanisms playa role.l- 8, 10 Immune complexes and immunoglobulin (Ig)A that could be chemoattractant to neutrophils have been demonstrated in
vivo in the stratum corneum. Elevated levels of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) have
been demonstrated in the serum and pustules of a human with subcorneal pustular
dermatosis." Some cases of human subcorneal pustular dermatosis are associated with the
presence or development of paraproteinemia (usually the IgA type), with or without
myeloma, but this condition has not been reported in dogs."
IgA myelomas and intraepidermal IgA deposits have been described in humans.'?

Clinical Features
No apparent age (6 months to 14 years old) or sex predilection exists. Although many
breeds have been affected, Miniature schnauzers have accounted for about 40% of the
cases.
Affected dogs usually have a multifocal to generalized, pustular to seborrhea-like
dermatitis. The head and trunk, particularly, are affected in a symmetric fashion. Intact
pustules are usually nonfollicular, greenish yellow, and transient, persisting for only 2 to 4
hours at a time (Fig. 18-lA and B). Thus, the affected dogs often have only circular areas
of alopecia, erosion, scaling, crusting, and epidermal collarettes. Lesions tend to heal
centrally, often with hyperpigmentation, and to spread peripherally, producing annular and
serpiginous configurations. Rarely, the footpads are affected and peel superficially. Pruritus
varies from nonexistent to extreme. The course of the dermatosis is often to erupt and
regress. Usually, the dogs are otherwise healthy. Occasional dogs have peripheral lymphadenopathy; rarely, they have pyrexia, anorexia, and depression.

Diagnosis
Because this dermatosis is diagnosed by the exclusion of other conditions, improved
diagnostic techniques should make it rare.
The differential diagnosis includes bacterial folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, linear IgA
pustular dermatosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, seborrheic skin disease, scabies, atopy, and food hypersensitivity. Definitive diagnosis is based
on history, physical examination, exclusion through laboratory testing, and response to
therapy. Subcorneal pustular dermatosis responds poorly to systemic antibiotics, systemic
glucocorticoids, and topical agents. Direct smears from intact pustules usually reveal
numerous nondegenerate neutrophils, occasional acantholytic keratinocytes, and no micro1125

1126 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-1. See legend on opposite page

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1127

FIGURE 18-2. Canine subcorneal pustular dermatosis, Cytologic
examination reveals nondegenerate
neutrophils and no microorganisms.

organisms (Fig. 18-2). Carefully performed cultures from intact pustules are usually
negative, but a few colonies of coagulase-negative or coagulase-positive staphylococci are
occasionally isolated. Immunofluorescence testing results are negative. Skin biopsy reveals
intraepidermal (subcomeal) pustular dermatitis." 8 Acantholysis is usually minimal, but it is
occasionally marked. Neutrophils do not show degenerative changes. Hair follicles are
rarely involved (Figs. 18-3 and 18-4).
Up to one half of affected dogs may have mild to moderate mature neutrophilia (13.8
to 21.1 X 103/ml).8 Serum protein electrophoresis occasionally reveals increased amounts
of Ub U 2, and {3 globulins. 8

Clinical Management
The drug of choice in subcomeal pustular dermatosis is dapsone (see Chap. 9), which is
given orally at 1 mg/kg q8h. A beneficial response usually occurs in 1 to 4 weeks. In a
minority of cases, the therapy can be stopped and long-term remission may result; more
often, however, the drug is tapered to maintenance levels, with the dosage varying from
dog to dog (1 mg/kg, q24h to twice a week).
In dogs, the major side effects of dapsone have been hematologic and hepatic. Many
dogs experience mild nonregenerative anemia and leukopenia as well as mild to moderate
elevations of serum alanine aminotransferase during induction therapy. If these laboratory
abnormalities are not associated with clinical signs, it is not necessary to stop therapy; the
levels will return to normal when maintenance doses are achieved. Dapsone has also
caused fatal thrombocytopenia in one dog, profound leukopenia in one dog, occasional
vomiting and diarrhea, and generalized, pruritic erythematous maculopapular skin eruptions." Dapsone is not licensed for use in dogs.

FIGURE 18-1. A, Multiple nonfoilicular pustules on the abdomen of a dog with subcorneal pustular dermatosis, B,
Close-up view of A. C, Feline plasma cell pododermatitis. Swollen footpad with cross-hatched white striae.
D, Feline plasma cell pododennatitis. Ulcerated nodule projecting from a footpad. E, Lichenoid dermatitis on the chest and
forelegs of a dog. F, Same dog as in E. Lichenoid papules and plaques on the chest. G, Idiopathic lichenoid dermatitis in a
cat. Cluster of lichenoid papules in the preauricular area. H, Same cat as in G. Cluster of lichenoid papules and plaques in
the axillary area.

I I 28 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-3. Canine subcomeal pustular dermatosis. A large subcomeal pustule.

Very rarely, dogs have apparently become resistant to dapsone. These dogs mayor
may not benefit from the oral administration of sulfasalazine (Azulfidine, Pharmacia &
Upjohn), 10 to 20 mg/kg q8h, until the dermatosis is controlled, and then as needed.
Chronic administration of sulfasalazine may be associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
One dog that did not respond to dapsone was successfully treated with injectable gold
salts."

FIGURE 18-4. Canine subcomeal pustular dermatosis. Subcomeal pustules that do not
involve hair follicles.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1129

• FELINE PLASMA CELL PODODERMATITIS
Plasma cell pododermatitis is a rare cutaneous disorder of cats." 16. 17

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of this disorder are unknown. The tissue plasmacytosis, the
consistent hypergammaglobulinemia, and the beneficial response to immunomodulating
drugs suggest an immune-mediated pathogenesis. However, the localization to pads and
favorable response to surgery suggest a structural component to the etiology. In addition,
some cases have recurred seasonally, suggesting that the condition is an allergic response.
In one study, 50% of the cats with plasma cell pododermatitis had concurrent feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection.v' In the latter study, four of six cats with FIV
infection had plasma cell pododermatitis." In this study, immunohistochemical examination of an affected footpad from one cat demonstrated FIV-immunoreactive cells within
the inflammatory infiltrate.

Clinical Features
No age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent. Clinically, plasma cell pododermatitis
begins as a soft, painless swelling of multiple footpads on multiple paws (see Fig. 18-1e).
Rarely, a single footpad is involved. The central metacarpal or metatarsal pads are usually
affected. Lightly pigmented pads may take on a violaceous hue. The surface of affected
pads is cross-hatched with white scaly striae. Affected pads are swollen and feel mushy or
flaccid. Initially, the cat is usually asymptomatic.P The cats are usually otherwise healthy.
In some cases, one or more pads may become ulcerated and secondarily infected, which
occasionally results in pain, lameness, and regional lymphadenopathy. Cats occasionally
experience recurring hemorrhage from ulcerated or nodular areas of a footpad (see Fig.
18-1D).19
A minority of cats with plasma cell pododermatitis also have plasma cell stomatitis,
which is characterized by ulceroproliferative gingivitis and symmetric vegetative plaques at
the palatine arches.l" In addition, a cat occasionally has immune-mediated glomerulonephritis or renal amyloidosis.!?

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes infectious or sterile granulomas and pyogranulomas,
eosinophilic granuloma, mosquito or insect bite reaction, or neoplasia, all of which typically affect only one footpad. A tentative diagnosis may be based on history, physical
examination, and aspiration cytologic study wherein plasma cells are numerous. Definitive
diagnosis is based on culture and biopsy, Neutrophilia and lymphocytosis may be visible,
and hypergammaglobulinemia is typical.
Serum protein electrophoresis reveals polyclonal gammopathy. Carefully performed
cultures are negative. Aspiration cytologic study reveals numerous plasma cells with
smaller numbers of lymphocytes and neutrophils. Antinuclear antibody test results are
occasionally positive, and direct immunofluorescence testing rarely reveals Ig at the basement membrane zone. However, these latter two immunologic findings are nondiagnostic.
Most cats in the original reports were feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-negative and FIVnegative.I 6• 17, 19 In another study, 50% of cats were FIV-positive. 14
Skin biopsy of early lesions is characterized by superficial and deep perivascular
dermatitis, with plasma cells predominating. Later lesions are characterized by diffuse
plasmacytic dermatitis (Figs. 18-5 and 18-6).3,4 Many plasma cells contain Russell's
bodies (Mott's cells). Numbers of neutrophils are variable, reflecting the absence or
presence of ulceration and secondary infection. Rarely, leukocytoclastic vasculitis is also
present.

1130 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-5. Feline plasma cell pododermatitis. Diffuse plasmacytic dermatitis.

Clinical Management
The therapy of choice is not clear. Because plasma cell pododermatitis is usually asymptomatic and may spontaneously regress, treatment may not be indicated in most cases.
When treatment is necessary, both large doses of systemic glucocorticoid (prednisone or
prednisolone administered orally at 4.4 mg/kg q24h) or chrysotherapy (see Chap. 9) may
be effectivep· 15-17. 19 Triamcinolone acetonide, 0.4 to 0.6 mg/kg q24h, or dexamethasone,
0.5 mg q24h, as initial treatments may be effective in cases refractory to prednisone. Once
effective, the dose of glucocorticoids is reduced. A clear response to therapy is evident in
2 to 3 weeks, and maximum improvement occurs in 10 to 14 weeks. Footpads may remain slightly enlarged. Focal ulcers or nodules that hemorrhage usually require surgical
correction.l- 19 Surgical excision of the fatty footpad has also been described as beneficial,
with no recurrence of disease in the surgically treated pads with follow-up periods of 2
years.I- 14. 19a

• LICHENOID DERMATOSES
Lichenoid dermatoses are rare, usually idiopathic skin disorders of dogs and cats. 2 1 - 26

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 3 I

FIGURE 18-6. Feline plasma cell pododennatitis. Numerous plasma cells.

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of most of these dermatoses are unclear; their clinical and
histopathologic features suggest an immune-mediated pathomechanism.'

Clinical Features
There are no confirmed age, breed, or sex predilections. However, Doberman pinschers
have accounted for several of the published cases.P- 23, 26 Lichenoid dermatoses are characterized by the usually asymptomatic, symmetric onset of grouped, angular, flat-topped
papules that develop a scaly to markedly hyperkeratotic surface (see Fig, 18-1E to H).
Lesions may coalesce to form hyperkeratotic, alopecic plaques, and they may occur
anywhere on the body. Lesions may appear anywhere, though we find that the concave
surface of the pinnae and ventral thorax and abdomen are commonly affected. Lesions
may be limited to the pinnae.P" Affected animals are usually otherwise healthy.

Diagnosis
These lesions are usually visually diagnostic. The differential diagnosis includes psoriasiform lichenoid dermatosis of English Springer spaniels, staphylococcal folliculitis, and
dermatophytosis. Various granulomatous and neoplastic conditions (especially the plaquelike forms of viral papillomas) rarely enter into the differential diagnosis. Definitive
diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, exclusion through laboratory testing,
and skin biopsy. Carefully performed cultures are negative. Skin biopsy reveals hyperkeratotic and hyperplastic lichenoid and hydropic interface dermatitis (Fig. 18-7). The inflammatory infiltrate is characteristically lymphoplasmacytic. If intraepidermal pustular dermatitis, suppurative folliculitis, or both are present, one should suspect a lichenoid tissue
reaction in response to staphylococcal infection. Such cases respond to appropriate systemic antibiotic therapy. If eosinophilic microabscesses are present, one should suspect a

1132 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-7. Canine idiopathic lichenoid dermatitis. Lichenoid interface dermatitis.

lichenoid tissue reaction in response to an ectoparasite (especially scabies or cheyletiellosis) or Malassezia.

Clinical Management
The prognosis for canine and feline idiopathic lichenoid dermatoses appears to be good.
All cases have undergone spontaneous remission after a course of 6 months to 2 years. No
form of therapy has been shown to be beneficial. In humans, oral retinoids have been
useful in many cases.' Focal lesions have responded to surgical excision, and laser therapy
may be beneficial. Antibiotic therapy has improved some lesions, though recurrences are
possible .

• CANINE STERILE EOSINOPHILIC PUSTULOSIS
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis is a rare idiopathic dermatosis of dogs.28 • 29. 32. 33, 35

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis are unknown. The peripheral eosinophilia, sterile tissue
eosinophilia, and responsiveness to systemic glucocorticoids that characterize this syndrome suggest that it may be immune mediated. However, intradermal skin testing,
hypoallergenic diets, and immunopathologic studies have not been helpful in elucidating
the etiopathogenesis. The cause in humans is unknown, though an association with human
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome has been reported." The condition in one human
was thought to represent an adverse cutaneous reaction to indeloxazine.s? Cats also rarely
experience a clinical and pathologic sterile eosinophilic folliculitis; the clinical presentation
is different, however, and the lesions are associated with an underlying hypersensitivity
such as atopy, food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity, and mosquito bite hypersensitivity (see Chap. 8).34

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1133

Clinical Features
No apparent age, breed, or sex predilections exist. The onset of clinical signs is often
acute, and the distribution of lesions is multifocal (especially involving the trunk) or
generalized. Pruritic, erythematous, follicular and nonfollicular papules and pustules evolve
into annular erosions with epidermal collarettes (Fig. 18-8A and B). Peripheral spread,
central healing, and hyperpigmentation of lesions result in numerous target lesions. Although most dogs are otherwise healthy, fever, anorexia, depression, and peripheral lymphadenopathy may be present.

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, drug
reaction, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, hemogram, direct smears, cultures, and skin biopsy. Most dogs have
peripheral eosinophilia (up to 5.6 X 103/ml). Direct smears reveal numerous eosinophils,
nondegenerative neutrophils, occasional acantholytic keratinocytes, and no microorganisms
(Fig. 18-9).33 Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy reveals intraepidermal
eosinophilic pustular dermatitis and eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis (Fig. 1810).33 Flame figures are occasionally visible in the surrounding dermis. Direct and indirect
immunofluorescence results are negative. 33 Serum a, {3, and l' globulins may be elevated."

Clinical Management
Most dogs respond well to systemic glucocorticoids (oral prednisone or prednisolone, 2.2
to 4.4 mg/kg q24h) in 5 to 10 days; however, stopping treatment consistently results in
relapses. Thus, long-term, alternate-morning therapy is indicated, and cure is unlikely. In
two dogs that could not be treated with glucocorticoids, we had good success with
dapsone or the combination of an antihistamine (diphenhydramine) and an omega-6 and
omega-3 fatty acid supplement (Derm Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals). Isotretinoin and
mterferon-os, were successful in treating two humans with eosinophilic pustular folliculitis.27. 31

• FELINE HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROME
The hypereosinophilic syndrome is a rare disorder of cats. 37,39 It is characterized by
persistent idiopathic eosinophilia associated with a diffuse infiltration of various organs by
mature eosinophils.

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of this syndrome are unknown. It represents a leukoproliferative process likely caused by a number of disorders, all of which are marked by sustained
overproduction of eosinophils.P

Clinical Features
The disease is more common in middle-aged female cats. 37. 39 Tissue infiltration with
mature eosinophils results in multisystemic organ dysfunction. The bone marrow, lymph
nodes, liver, spleen, and gastrointestinal tract are typically involved. Rarely, cardiac abnormalities are found; in one cat, restrictive cardiomyopathy was a clinical feature.'? The most
common clinical signs include diarrhea, weight loss, vomiting, and anorexia.P? Physical
examination often reveals thickened bowel loops, lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. Rarely, affected cats have dermatosis characterized by generalized maculopapular

1134 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-8. See legend on opposite page

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1135

FIGURE 18-9. Canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Cytologic examination reveals numerous eosinophils.

erythema, severe pruritus, marked excoriation, and possibly wheals and soft tissue swellings of the limbs (see Fig. I8-8e and D).36, 38, 4!

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, exclusion through laboratory testing,
and skin biopsy. There are no specific tests for this syndrome: Rather, the syndrome is
defined by a combination of unexplained prolonged eosinophilia and evidence of multiorgan involvement.': 5, 42 Flea bite hypersensitivity, eosinophilic granuloma complex, food
hypersensitivity, asthma, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, endoparasitic infections, and mast cell
tumor should be ruled out. The other consideration is eosinophilic leukemia, which is very
similar but may show abnormal cells and an increased M/E ratio greater than 10: I on
bone marrow examination.F Moderate to marked peripheral eosinophilia (average, 42.6 X
103/ml) is characteristic in cats. Direct smears of skin lesions reveal a predominance of
eosinophils and basophils. Skin biopsy reveals variable degrees of superficial and deep
perivascular-to-interstitial dermatitis, with eosinophils predominating.

Clinical Management
The prognosis is poor; in most cases, survival times are short and patients do not respond
to any treatment. Cats with cutaneous lesions may have slowly progressive disease and
longer survival times (2 to 4 years).36, 4! These cats may have a favorable, but transient,
response to high doses of glucocorticoids. Interferon-a has been beneficial in treating
some humans.l- 42

FIGURE 18-8. A, Canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Pustules and annular erosions on the abdomen. B, Close-up of
the dog in A. Annular erosion with epidermal collarettes. C, Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome. Erythema and excoriation
of the face and pinna. D, Same cat as in C. Erythema, alopecia, and excoriation over the back. E, Canine sterile
pyogranuloma. Erythematous nodules bordering footpads. F, Canine sterile pyogranuloma. Erythematous nodules bordering
nostrils. G, Canine sterile pyogranuloma. Multiple erythematosus, ulcerated, crusted papules around the eye. H, Idiopathic
sterile pyogranulomas in a cat. Violaceous papules and nodules on the top of the head (the area has been clipped).

1136 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-10. Canine sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Subcomeal eosinophilic pustular dermatitis
and eosinophilic luminal folliculitis.

• IDIOPATHIC STERILE GRANULOMA AND PYOGRANULOMA
Idiopathic, sterile, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous skin disease is uncommon in dogs
and very rare in cats. 44, 46, 48

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of these conditions are unknown. The characteristic granulomatous histopathologic appearance, absence of microbial agents and foreign material, and
good response to systemic glucocorticoids suggest an aberrant inflammatory histiocytic
response. The favorable response of some dogs to tetracycline/doxycycline and niacinamide
also supports an immune dysfunction. It has been proposed that this syndrome is due to
immune dysfunction in response to a chronic antigenic stimulus and is related to cutaneous histiocytosis.P
In human sarcoidosis, a classic "sterile" granulomatous disease, polymerase chain
reaction (peR) technology has shown that mycobacterial (multiple species) DNA is
present in most Iesions.v- Similar studies in canine and feline sterile granulomatous
dermatoses are awaited.

Clinical Features

DOG
The disorder may occur in dogs of all ages, breeds, and sexes, but collies, Weimaraners,
Great Danes, Boxers, and Golden retrievers may be predisposed.f Lesions are usually
multiple and typically affect the head (especially the bridge of the nose, the muzzle, and
the periocular region), the pinnae, and the paws. Firm, painless, nonpruritic, dermal
papules, plaques, and nodules are present (see Fig. 18-8E to G). The lesions may
become alopecic, ulcerated, and secondarily infected, especially on the paws. Animals are

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 37
usually otherwise healthy. One dog with sterile pyogranuloma syndrome had associated
hypercalcemta.P

CAT
In cats, two clinical syndromes have been described.': 48 Some animals have pruritic
papules and nodules on the head and pinnae (see Fig. 18-8B). Lesions are usually
erythematous to violaceous in color. Other cats present with pruritic, symmetric, preauricular plaques (preauricular xanthogranulomas) (Fig. 18-11).3, 48 Papules and wheal-like
lesions coalesce to form orange-yellow, friable, well-circumscribed plaques. These plaques
become reddish purple on palpation.

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes other granulomatous and pyogranulomatous (bacterial,
mycotic, foreign body) and neoplastic disorders. Definitive diagnosis is based on history,
physical examination, cultures, and biopsy. The major differential diagnoses are the infectious diseases. Cytologic examination reveals pyogranulomatous or granulomatous inflammation with no microorganisms (Fig. 18-12). In rare cases of mycobacterial diseases,
direct smears from lesions reveal mycobacteria; formalin-fixed tissue samples are negative.
Direct smears stained with acid-fast stains for mycobacteria should be examined cytologically. Cultures (aerobic, anaerobic, mycobacterial, and fungal) are best grown from tissue
taken by aseptic surgical biopsy techniques, and they are negative. In dogs, biopsy usually
reveals nodular to diffuse, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Early lesions show a characteristic vertical orientation of oblong (sausage-shaped)
perifollicular granulomas or pyogranulomas that track, but do not initially involve, the hair
follicles (Figs. 18-13 to 18-15).46 In later, larger lesions, the pyogranulomatous-to-granulomatous process becomes diffuse, often severely attenuating or obliterating adnexae and
even extending into the subcutis. Special stains and polarization reveal no microorganisms
or foreign material. Rarely, dogs have diffuse sarcoidal granulomatous dermatitis (Fig.
18-16).49 peR testing for infectious agents may also be considered.
In cats, biopsy of the papulonodular lesions on the head and pinnae reveals perifollic-

FIGURE 18-11. Idiopathic sterile granulomas in a cat. Preauricular
plaque.

1138 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-12. Canine sterile
pyogranuloma. Cytologic examination reveals macrophages, nondegenerate neutrophils, and no microorganisms.

ular pyogranulomatous dermatitis." Biopsy of the preauricular plaques reveals diffuse
granulomatous dermatitis that is separated from epithelial structures by a narrow Grenz
zone, contains numerous multinucleated histiocytic giant cells, and exhibits unexplained
purpura (Figs. 18-17 and 18-18).3.48

Clinical Management
Therapy may consist of surgical excision of solitary lesions, if feasible, or of systemic
glucocorticoids if multiple lesions are present or surgery is impractical." Some cases may

FIGURE 18-13. Canine idiopathic sterile granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis that tends
to track appendages (AOG stain).

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1139

FIGURE

18-14. Canine sterile

granuloma.
titis.

Granulomatous

derma-

respond to tetracycline/niacinamide, even when glucocorticoids are ineffective (see Chap.
3).47 Doxycycline and niacinamide may also be effective. Tetracycline and niacinamide are
dosed at 250 mg q8h in dogs under 10 kg and 500 mg q8h in dogs over 10 kg. In dogs,
prednisone or prednisolone is administered orally at 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg q24h until the
lesions have regressed in 7 to 14 days. About 60% of dogs then require prolonged
alternate-morning glucocorticoid therapy.v'
Occasionally, cases in dogs are unresponsive to glucocorticoids or become refractory
after variable periods of remission. Azathioprine (Imuran, Glaxo Wellcome) is useful in
such cases and is administered orally at 2.2 mg/kg q24h until remission, then on alternate
days. Once remission has been maintained for several months, therapy may be successfully

FIGURE 18-1 S. Canine sterile
pyogranuloma.
dermatitis.

Pyogranulomatous

1140 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-16. Canine sterile
sarcoidal granuloma. Confluent sarcoidal (naked epithelioid) granulomas.

discontinued in some cases. Others may require long-term low-dose therapy. We have
occasionally been able to reduce the dosage and frequency of administration of azathioprine to 0.25 mg/kg once weekly. The oral administration of sodium iodide has been
reported useful in some cases" but not in others." In cats, lesions often spontaneously
resolve after about 9 months."

• GRANULOMATOUS SEBACEOUS ADENITIS
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis is an uncommon idiopathic dermatosis of dogs and is
rare in cats.2, 53, 60, 62-66 Since the description of this condition in the dog, a histopathologically similar disease has been recognized in humans. 55 , ,59

FIGURE 18-17. Feline preauricular granuloma. Diffuse granulomatous dermatitis with narrow Grenz
zone (arrows).

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1 141

FIGURE 18-18. Feline preauricular granuloma. Numerous histiocytes and multinucleated histiocytic
giant cells.

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of the disorder are unknown, but speculations include
the following. (1) sebaceous gland destruction is a developmental and inherited defect;
(2) sebaceous gland destruction is due to a cell-mediated immunologic reaction directed
against a component of the gland; (3) the initial defect is a keratinization abnormality with
subsequent obstruction of the sebaceous ducts, resulting in inflammation of the glands;
and (4) the sebaceous adenitis and keratinization defects are the result of an abnormality
in lipid metabolism.v 51. 61, 64 Studies in rodents suggest that primary sebaceous gland
disease and destruction can result in follicular plugging and inadequate dissociation of the
internal root sheath from the hair shaft, which results in hair shafts perforating the bulbar
area of the hair follicle and causing intlarnmation.v"
Preliminary pedigree analysis of affected and related Standard Poodles suggests an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.P However, because over 25% of affected dogs
may have subclinical disease, breeding studies are being undertaken to confirm the mode
of inheritance.

Clinical Features

DOG
There is no apparent sex predilection, and the disorder tends to appear in young adult
to middle-aged dogs. Although many breeds and mongrels may be affected, there are
breed predilections for Standard Poodles, Akitas, Vizslas, Samoyeds, and Belgian sheepdogs. 2 , 54, 64, 66 In general, the dermatologic abnormalities are bilaterally symmetric; prominent on the face, head, pinnae, and trunk; and dominated by abnormal keratinization (see
Fig. 18-20B). Initial lesions usually occur on the dorsal surfaces of the body, particularly
the head and cervical region. Some dogs have severe involvement of the tail ("rat-tail").66
Secondary pyoderma may be present and can be superficial folliculitis or deep folliculitis
and furunculosis. In one study, 43% of patients had concurrent pyoderma." Ceruminous
otitis externa is common.P' In Belgian sheepdogs, bilateral suppurative otitis externa was a
constant finding,54 In addition, the disease in Belgian sheepdogs seemed to be photoaggravated." The cutaneous changes are somewhat dependent on haircoat type and breed.
In short-coated dogs, such as Vizslas and Dachshunds, lesions begin as generally
annular areas of scaling and alopecia that tend to enlarge peripherally, to become polycyclic, and occasionally to coalesce (Fig. 18-19A). The surface scales are usually fine, white,

1142 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-19. A, canine granulomatous sebaceous adenitis. Annular and arciform areas of alopecia and scaling
in a Vizsla. B, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Early disease in an Akita with a thin, broken, dishevelled haircoat. C,
Canine sebaceous adenitis. Advanced disease in an Akita, with pronounced hair loss, hyperkeratosis, and dermatitic
areas. D, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Marked hyperkeratosis, follicular casting, and broken hairs. E, Feline sebaceous
adenitis. Marked follicular hyperkeratosis, broken hairs, and alopecia over the trunk. F, Canine morphea, Alopecic,
shiny plaque on lateral elbow. G, Feline indolent ulcer. Bilateral lip ulcers that are chronic and necrotic. H,
Eosinophilic plaque in scattered patches on the eat's abdomen and chest. Hair has been clipped away. Lesions are
well demarcated, red, moist, and raised and have been licked incessantly.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1143

and nonadherent. Hair casts are prominent. Lesions are usually asymptomatic, unless
secondary staphylococcal infection occurs. Intermittent edematous swelling of the muzzle,
lips, and eyelids occurs occasionally.56. 65.66
The Standard Poodle manifests marked hyperkeratosis followed by alopecia. The hairs
are dull and brittle, with tightly adherent, silver-white scales that incorporate small tufts of
matted hairs. Hair casts are prominent. In some cases, the initial changes may be a loss of
the tight curls as the hair straightens and coat color changes (Fig. 18-20A). Lesions often
begin on the face and pinnae but progressively involve the neck and dorsal trunk.
Akitas tend to have fairly generalized, erythematous and greasy skin changes (see Fig.
18-19B to D). Papules, pustules, scales, matting of the hair, and yellow-brown greasy
keratosebaceous debris are usually prominent. Hair casts are often prominent (Fig. 1820C). Severe hair loss, especially of the undercoat, is often present. Secondary pyoderma
is common and often more severe in this breed when sebaceous adenitis is present. Some
animals may show signs of systemic illness, such as fever, malaise, and weight loss.
Samoyeds experience moderate to severe, predominantly truncal alopecia and scaling.
Hairs are dull, brittle, and broken. Hair casts are prominent.
In German shepherds, lesions may begin on the tail and progress cranially on the
body.
Dogs with granulomatous sebaceous adenitis are generally nonpruritic. However, secondary staphylococcal infection is a frequent complication, and affected animals may then
become pruritic. In the breeds that are not predisposed, sebaceous adenitis may occur as
acute-onset generalized exfoliative erythroderma that may be intensely pruritic. As these
cases progress, the erythroderma and pruritus ceases and alopecia results. At this point,
these cases are easily confused with endocrinopathies.

FIGURE 18-20. A, Sebaceous adenitis in a Poodle
showing hair with loss of tight curls. B, Sebaceous adenitis
in a Miniature Schnauzer. Note the numerous hair casts.
C, Canine sebaceous adenitis. Trichogram reveals prominent casts of keratosebaceous debris surrounding numerous
hair shafts.

1144 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

CAT
Lesions consist of multifocal annular areas of scales, crust, broken hairs, hair casts, and
alopecia (see Fig. 18-19E).57, 63, 64 Lesions begin on the head, pinnae, and neck, then
spread caudally on the body.

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes staphylococcal folliculitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis,
keratinization defects (especially seborrhea and ichthyosis), follicular dysplasia, and endocrinopathies. Skin scrapings and carefully performed cultures are negative. Prominent hair
casts are most likely associated with granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, seborrhea, vitamin
A- responsive dermatosis, demodicosis, and follicular dysplasia. Microscopic examination of
affected hairs reveals casts or collars of yellow-brown keratosebaceous material surrounding hair shafts at varying intervals (see Fig. 18-20C).
Dermatohistopathologlc findings are variable in intensity. They vary with the chronicity of the lesion and, to some extent, with the haircoat type and breed of animal.r- 3, 52, 64
In general, early lesions are characterized by variable degrees of sebaceous adenitis
(granulomatous to pyogranulomatous). In most cases, sebocytes are no longer visible
within the granulomas and the diagnosis is based on the finding of discrete perifollicular
granulomas in areas in which sebaceous glands are normally found (Figs. 18-21 and
18-22). The other adnexae are spared. Short-coated dogs (e.g., Vizslas) often have large
granulomatous lesions, some of which extend into the subcutis.
Chronic lesions are characterized by hyperplastic superficial perivascular dermatitis
with prominent orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis of epidermis and hair follicles and variable degrees of perifollicular fibrosis and follicular atrophy. Sebaceous glands
are absent. Standard Poodles may have only a scanty lymphocytic inflammation at the
level of the sebaceous duct, but no sebaceous glands are present. Nonpredisposed breeds
may have a noninflammatory, endocrine-like histologic pattern, but without sebaceous
glands. Complete absence of sebaceous glands is not a feature of endocrine disorders.

FIGURE 18-21. Sebaceous adenitis. Perifollicular granulomas where sebaceous glands should be.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1145

FIGURE 18-22. Canine granulomatous sebaceous adenitis. Sebaceous duct exiting a granuloma.

It has been reported that biopsies from clinically normal standard Poodles that were
still normal 2 years later may contain focal areas of mild granulomatous sebaceous adenitiS. 5 1, 64 Animals with secondary staphylococcal infections may have areas of neutrophilic
intraepidermal pustular dermatitis, suppurative folliculitis and furunculosis, and nodular to
diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis or panniculitis.
An immunohistologic study revealed that CDlc+, CDllc+ dendritic cells, neutrophils,
and CD3+ T lymphocytes dominated the cellular infiltrate." The majority of T lymphocytes were TCR-a/3+' CD8+, and CD4+. CD21 + B lymphocytes and plasma cells were
uncommon. Indirect immunofluorescence results for circulating autoantibodies were negative.

Clinical Management
Many authors have found that response to therapy varies somewhat, depending on the
severity or chronicity of the disease and on the breed of animal.v 53, 54, 58, 64 Further
confusion is created by the fact that some dogs have cyclic patterns of spontaneous
improvement and worsening that are independent of any therapy." However, White and
colleagues reported that response to therapy could not be predicted on the basis of breed,
clinical signs, histopathologic findings, or presence or absence of sebaceous glands in skin
biopsy specimens.s" Mild cases may be satisfactorily controlled with keratolytic shampoos
and emollient rinses." More stubborn cases may benefit from the topical application of
50% to 75% propylene glycol in water as a spray or rinse once daily, then two to three

1146 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

times weekly as needed.s '" Some dogs respond to oral administration of products containing omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids; others do not. 2 , 56, 58, 64 We are aware of anecdotal
reports of beneficial effects from baby oil soaks (undiluted or diluted 1: 1 with water; let
stand 1 to 6 hours) followed by shampooing out the excess oil as a treatment for Poodles.
These applications are repeated weekly until maximum improvement is achieved, then
every 3 to 4 weeks as needed.
Systemic glucocorticoids are not efficacious, though they may help to decrease the
pruritus that may occur in generalized exfoliative cases." They do not alter the course of
the disease because sebaceous gland destruction and alopecia still occur.
In severe or refractory cases, synthetic retinoids (see Chap. 3) may be useful, though
their expense has severely limited their use. Synthetic retinoids were reported to be
effective in 60% of the dogs treated.t" "Effective" was defined as greater than 50%
reduction in scaling and alopecia, It was interesting to note that some dogs in which the
initial choice of retinoid (either isotretinoin or etretinate) failed did respond to the second
retinoid.
In the past, it was suggested that certain breeds respond more favorably to a particular type of retinoid (e.g., Vizslas and Poodles to isotretinoin; Akitas to etretinatel.P" 64. 65
However, this was not detected in the study by White and associates." In Belgian
sheepdogs, response to etretinate was minimal but response to isotretinoin was good. 54
Isotretinoin (1 to 2 mg/kg/q24h orally) and etretinate (1 to 2 mg/kg/q24h orally) have
been evaluated the most. Acitretin has replaced etretinate and is dosed at 0.5 to 2 mg/kg
q24h. 54a Responses to synthetic retinoids generally require 4 to 8 weeks of therapy, and
therapy must usually be continued for life. The potential side effects of synthetic retinoids
are legion (see Chap. 3), but they are uncommon and are usually mild when they do
OCCUr. 56
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Novartis, 5 mg/kg q12h orally) has been reported to be
effective in dogs in which synthetic retinoids failed. 2• 50 Cyclosporine commonly produced
side effects in dogs: gastrointestinal irritation, gingival hyperplasia, hirsutism, nephrotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, papillomatosis, increased frequency of bacterial and viral infections, and
lyrnphoplasmacytic dermatitis, when dosed at 20 to 30 mglkglday (see Chap. 3). These
side effects appear to be uncommon at the lower doses.
Rarely, dogs and cats undergo spontaneous remission.S': 57. 58. 64 Still other dogs respond to none of the currently recommended treatmentsP" One of the authors (DWS) has
treated a Standard Poodle that had failed to respond to multiple medicaments (topicals,
vitamin A, isotretinoin, etretinate, omega-6/omega-3 fatty acids) with tetracycline and
niacinamide (see Chap. 3), The keratinization abnormality gradually improved over a 4month period, and recurrent bacterial folliculitis ceased. Because of the possible hereditary nature of granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in certain breeds, it would be wise to
discourage the use of affected animals for breeding purposes. No information on the
treatment of granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in cats has been published,

• LOCALIZED SCLERODERMA
Localized scleroderma (morphea) is a rare disease of dogs and cats,67, 68, 70

Cause and Pathogenesis
In humans, the cause and pathogenesis of localized scleroderma are unknown.' Three
predominant theories on pathogenesis have emerged: (1) the vascular theory (early endothelial injury, perivascular fibrosis, hypoxia, and abnormal vascular reactivity); (2) the
abnormal collagen metabolism theory (increased production of collagen and reduced collagenase activity); and (3) the immunologic theory (humoral and cell-mediated autoimmunity). There are reports of Borrelia burgdorferi playing a role in the development of
morphea lesions in humans.'

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1147

Clinical Features
In dogs and cats, no age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent. Localized scleroderma
is characterized by asymptomatic, well-demarcated, sclerotic plaques that are alopecic,
smooth, and shiny (see Fig. 18-19F). Hypopigmentation may occur. Lesions tend to be
linear and to occur on the trunk and limbs. Affected animals are otherwise healthy.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on history, physical examination, and skin biopsy, Histopathologic
examination reveals fibrosing dermatitis. The overlying epidermis is unremarkable (Fig.
18-23A and B). The entire dermis and subcutis are replaced by collagenous tissue. The

FIGURE 18-23. A, Canine morphea. Normal skin peripheral to a lesion. B, Canine morphea.
Lesional skin. Fibrosing dermatitis.

1148 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

normal loosely woven, fine-fibered appearance of the superficial dermis is replaced by
dense collagen bundles. Pilosebaceous units are essentially absent. Mild superficial and
deep perivascular accumulation of lymphohistiocytic cells is present.

Clinical Management
The prognosis appears to be good. Spontaneous remission may occur over a course of
several weeks,67, 68 or permanent scarring may result." When regrowth occurs, the hair is
usually thinner and finer than normal, and it may be a slightly different color."? In
humans, no forms of topical or systemic therapy are known to be of regular benefit to
patients with localized scleroderma. In humans, pentoxifylline has been recommended for
morphea."

• FELINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
The eosinophilic granuloma complex includes a group of lesions that affect the skin,
mucocutaneous junctions, and oral cavity of cats. The term itself is often used as a final
diagnosis; in fact, there is another primary cause. It is essential to realize that the
eosinophilic granuloma complex is nothing more than a mucocutaneous reaction pattern in
cats-not a specific disease.
Three lesions have traditionally been recognized: (1) the indolent ulcer, (2) the
eosinophilic plaque, and (3) the eosinophilic granuloma. These lesions are common and
are most common in cats that have hypersensitivities (allergies) to inhalants, foods, or
insects, especially to fleas and mosquitoes (see Chap. 8).2.4,5,71.72,78,79,81 In a group of 88
cats with pruritus due to allergic skin diseases, 31% had one or more lesions of the
eosinophilic granuloma complex." In another study of 25 cats with suspected allergic skin
disease, only 12% had lesions compatible with eosinophilic granuloma complex: Intradermal testing results were positive for housedust mite in all three cats, for pollen in two
cats, and for flea antigen in one cat.71 The latter cat was still tentatively considered atopic.
Bacterial involvement occasionally is a factor because antibiotic therapy resolves or markedly improves some lesions,2,80
In some instances, these lesions may be heritable.v 77 Eosinophilic granulomas and
indolent ulcers occurred in a colony of specific pathogen - free cats and other cats with
limited genetic diversity.57 A genetic dysregulation of eosinophil signaling and/or regulation
was suspected. These cats typically "outgrew" their disease at 2 to 3 years of age.
Therefore, when no hypersensitivity can be documented, a heritable form of the disorder
should be considered. In contrast with what had been reported in earlier veterinary
literature, more recent attempts to transmit eosinophilic plaques by autologous tissue
techniques have been unsuccessful. 73
It has been postulated that some oral eosinophilic granulomas result from imbedded,
swallowed insect parts."

Feline Indolent Ulcer
Indolent ulcer (eosinophilic ulcer, rodent ulcer) is a common cutaneous, mucocutaneous,
and oral mucosal lesion of cats. Clinically, most indolent ulcers occur unilaterally on the
upper lip (see Fig. 18-19G). However, lesions also occur in the oral cavity, in other areas
of the skin, and bilaterally. The lesions are usually well circumscribed, red-brown, alopecic, and glistening; they have a raised border. Pruritus and pain are rare, and peripheral
lymphadenopathy may be present. There are no age or breed predilections, but females
may be predisposed. Lip ulcers appear to be precancerous and rarely undergo malignant
transformation into squamous cell carcinoma (see Chap. 20). Cats with indolent ulcers
may also have eosinophilic plaques, eosinophilic granulomas, or both.
The differential diagnosis includes infectious ulcers (bacterial, fungal, FeLV-associated), trauma, and neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor, lymphoma).

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1149

Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy is nondiagnostic, revealing hyperplastic,
ulcerated, superficial perivascular to interstitial dermatitis (with neutrophils and mononuclear cells usually predominating) and fibrosing dermatitis (Fig. 18-24). Blood eosinophilia
and tissue eosinophilia are rare. Chronic, recurrent, medically refractory cases should be
evaluated for underlying flea bite hypersensitivity, atopy, and food hypersensitivity.
Therapy with systemic glucocorticoids is often effective. Prednisone or prednisolone is
administered orally (4.4 mg/kg q24h) until the lesions are healed. Alternatively, methylprednisolone acetate (Depo-Medrol, Pharmacia & Upjohn) may be administered subcutaneously at 20 mg/cat every 2 weeks until the lesions are healed, or either dexamethasone
(0.4 mg/kg q24h) or triamcinolone (0.8 mg/kg q24h) may be administered orally. Recurrent lesions may be managed with alternate-evening oral glucocorticoids or repeated
subcutaneous injections of methylprednisolone (never more frequently than every 2
months).
Medically refractory lesions should be evaluated for underlying hypersensitivity disorders and managed appropriately. Some refractory lesions respond to systemic antibiotics
(e.g., amoxicillin clavulanate, cefadroxil, enrofloxacin) or topical mupirocin.t- 74, 80 Antibiotic-responsive lesions contain numerous neutrophils on cytologic and histopathologic examination. Other methods of treatment reported to be occasionally successful in feline
indolent ulcer include radiotherapy, cryosurgery, laser therapy, surgical excision, mixed
bacterial vaccines, and immunomodulating drugs such as levamisole, thiabendazole, interferon-a (60 to 300 units/day, orally or subcutaneously, for 30 days [see Chap. 3]), and
aurothioglucose (Solganal, Schering-Ploughj.v 4, 5, 74 Progestational compounds, such as
megestrol acetate (Ovaban, Schering-Plough) have also been effective in many cases of
feline indolent ulcer. However, these drugs are not recommended because of their side
effects.

Feline Eosinophilic Plaque
Eosinophilic plaque is a common cutaneous lesion of cats. Clinically, most eosinophilic
plaques occur on the abdomen and medial thighs (Fig. 18-25A; see Fig. 18-19B).

FIGURE 18-24. Histologic section of indolent ulcer. There is surface ulceratio~ with fibrin
covering the necrotic surface and a dense mononuclear cellular infiltrate in the dermis. Note
the ulcerative perivascular dermatitis. (From Scott, DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A
monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)

I 150 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-25. A, Feline eosinophilic plaque. Raised, erythematous abdominal plaque. B, Typical eosinophilic granuloma on a white eat's rear leg with hair clipped away. The firm cordlike masses are slightly pink and
not ulcerated, painful, or pruritic. C, Eosinophilic granuloma bilaterally located at the angles of the jaw behind
Legend continued on opposite page

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 5 I

FIGURE 18-26. A, Feline eosinophilic plaque. Diffuse spongiosis of
epidermis and hair follicle outer root
sheaths. E, Feline eosinophilic
plaque. Diffuse spongiosis and rnicrovesicle or microvesicopustule formation in the epidermis.

Lesions may be single or multiple, and they may also occur on mucocutaneous junctions
or in other areas of the skin. Eosinophilic plaques are well circumscribed, raised, round to
oval, red, oozing, often ulcerated, and 0.5 to 7 cm in diameter. Pruritus is usually severe.
Peripheral lymphadenopathy may be present. Cats with eosinophilic plaque may also have
indolent ulcers, eosinophilic granulomas, or both. Lesions that are histologically similar to
eosinophilic plaques occasionally occur in the conjunctiva'" and cornea." There are nO age
or breed predilections, but females may be predisposed.

FIGURE 18-25 Continued. the last molars. A metal mouth gag and plastic endotracheal tube can be seen. The ulcerated
lesions have a fibronecrotic surface. Radiation therapy caused prompt remission. D, Feline eosinophilic granuloma. Pinkish
nodule on the lower lip. E, Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Greenish brown mass on the ventrolateral aspect of the tongue
near the commissure of the lips. (Courtesy of J. O. Noxon.) F, Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Erythematous papules and
nodules on the abdomen. G, Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Ulcerated nodule on prepuce. H, Canine eosinophilic
granuloma. Ulcerated nodule on a foot.

1152 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

The differential diagnosis includes infectious granulomas (bacterial, fungal) and neoplasia (mast cell tumor, lymphoma). Carefully performed cultures are negative. Biopsy
reveals hyperplastic superficial and deep perivascular dermatitis with eosinophilia, to interstitial or diffuse eosinophilic dermatitis (Fig. 18-27). Flame figures are possible. Diffuse
spongiosis, which involves the outer root sheaths of hair follicles (Fig. 18-26A), and
eosinophilic microvesicles and microabscesses may be visible (Fig. 18-26B). Some lesions
have remarkable mucinosis of the epidermis and hair follicle outer root sheath.s 5 and
some involve the subcutaneous fat. Direct immunofluorescence testing frequently reveals
the intercellular deposition of Ig within the epidermis (a pemphigus-like pattern)." Blood
and tissue eosinophilia are constant.
Methods of treatment are as described for feline indolent ulcer. Anecdotal reports
indicate that interferon-a is not effective for eosinophilic plaques (see Chap. 3). In
addition, anecdotal reports indicate that occlusive biosynthetic absorbent wound dressings
(e.g., Biodres Wound Dressing, DVM) applied to lesions for 48 hours may be effective.s?

Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma
Eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma) is a common cutaneous, mucocutaneous, and
oral mucosal lesion of cats. Clinically, most eosinophilic granulomas occur on the caudal
thighs, on the face, and in the oral cavity (especially the tongue and palate). On the
caudal thigh, the lesions are usually well circumscribed, raised, firm, yellowish to pink
plaques with a distinctive linear configuration (see Fig. 18-25B). They are often discovered accidentally because they are usually nonpruritic. Lesions on the face and in the oral
cavity have a papular to nodular configuration (see Fig. 18-25C). Eosinophilic granuloma
is the most common cause of lower lip swellings and nodules (pouting cats) and asymptomatic swollen chins (fat-chinned cats, feline chin edema) in the cat (see Fig. 18-25D).
When the surface of eosinophilic granulomas is eroded or ulcerated, a characteristic
speckling with pinpoint white foci (corresponding to foci of collagen flame figures) may be
visible. Peripheral lymphadenopathy may be present. Cats with eosinophilic granuloma
may also have indolent ulcers, eosinophilic plaques, or both. Lesions that are histologically
similar to eosinophilic granulomas occasionally occur in the conjunctiva." There are no
age or breed predilections, but females may be predisposed.
The differential diagnosis includes infectious bacterial or fungal granulomas, insect

FIGURE 18-27. Feline eosinophilic plaque. Diffuse dennal infiltration of predominantly eosinophils.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1153

FIGURE 18-28. A, Feline eosinophilic granuloma on chin.
Early granuloma formation centered on flame figures (arrows).
B, Feline eosinophilic granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis associated with flame figures. (B from Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:
331, 1980.)

bite reactions, and neoplasia. Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse granulomatous dermatitis
with multifocal areas of flame figure formation (Fig. 18-28). Eosinophils and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells are common (Fig. 18-29). Mucinosis of the epidermis and hair
follicle outer root sheath, focal infiltrative to necrotizing mural eosinophilic folliculitis or
furunculosis, and focal eosinophilic panniculitis may be present. Older lesions are characterized by palisading granuloma formation around the flame figures. Eosinophils are less
prominent in chronic lesions. Apparent insect parts are rarely seen within lesions. Blood
eosinophilia may occur, especially with oral lesions. Carefully performed cultures are
negative.
Methods of treatment are as described for feline indolent ulcer. Anecdotal reports
indicate that interferon-a is not effective for eosinophilic granulomas (see Chap. 3).
Interestingly, many eosinophilic granulomas occurring in cats younger than 1 year spontaneously regress over a period of 3 to 5 months. Omega-3/omega-6 fatty acid-containing
products (Derm Caps Liquid, DVM Pharmaceuticals) are effective in some cases and
reduce glucocorticoid requirements in others (see Chap. 3).

• CANINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA
Eosinophilic granulomas are rare, idiopathic, nodular to plaquelike lesions associated with
flame figure formation in the oral cavity and skin of dogs. 2 • 5, 82, 84-86, 88, 89

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause of cutaneous granulomas associated with flame figures is poorly understood, In
humans, occasional cases have been reported after insect bites, tuberculin tests, and other
forms of trauma, Proposed pathomechanisms include vasculitis, microangiopathy, disorder

I I 54 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-29. Feline eosinophilic granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis associated with
Harne figures and foreign-body giant cells. (High-power view of Fig. 18-28B.)

of fibrinolysis, disorder of phagocytic function, disorder of catabolic enzyme release, and
cell-mediated immune response. In dogs, no antecedent trauma or disease has been
recognized, and cultures for bacteria, fungi, and viruses are negative. Macerated tissue
from lesions produces no lesions in dogs that have been injected. The tissue eosinophilia,
occasional blood eosinophilia, and glucocorticoid responsiveness of lesions have prompted
speculation regarding a hypersensitivity state. In addition, the tendency of the oral form of
the disease to occur in Siberian huskies and Cavalier King Charles spaniels has suggested
a genetic basis for the disease. Some authors have reported the seasonal recurrence of
cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas in dogs, suggesting that the condition may be a hypersensitivity reaction to pollens, molds, and insects.

Clinical Features
Although any age, breed, or sex of dog may be affected, eosinophilic granulomas are most
common in dogs less than 3 years of age (80% of cases), Siberian huskies (76%), and
males (72%). EOSinophilic granulomas occur most commonly in the oral cavity as ulcerated palatine plaques and vegetative lingual masses. The lingual masses often have a
greenish brown hue (see Fig. 18-25E). In Cavalier King Charles spaniels, lesions may be
solitary on the soft palate or bilateral near the tonsils.P Less commonly, they occur as
multiple cutaneous papules, nodules, and plaques over the ventral abdomen, prepuce,
digits, flanks, and cheek (see Figs. 18-25F to H and 18-30A). The cutaneous lesions are
usually nonpruritic and painless, and the dogs are otherwise healthy. Rarely, solitary
lesions occur in the external ear canal." There has been one report of a tracheal lesion.f"

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes granulomatous and neoplastic disorders. Diagnosis is
based on biopsy, Characteristic histopathologic findings include variably sized foci of flame
figure formation, eosinophilic and histiocytic cellular infiltration, and palisading granulomas
(Figs. 18-30B and 18-31). Properly performed cultures are negative, and blood eosinophiliaoccurs occasionally.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1155

FIGURE 18-30. A, Nodule of eosinophilic granuloma on the digit of a Siberian husky.
B, Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Granulomatous dermatitis associated with flame figures.

Clinical Management
Canine eosinophilic granulomas are usually very glucocorticoid responsive. Seventy-eight
percent of cases were treated with prednisolone or prednisone orally (0.5 to 2.2 mg/kg/
day); lesions regressed in 10 to 20 days, and no further therapy was needed. Some lesions
undergo spontaneous remission, and some lesions are seasonally or chronically recurrent.

• EOSINOPHILIC DERMATITIS AND EDEMA IN DOGS
A syndrome of eosinophilic dermatitis and edema has been described in dogs and compared with eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells' syndrome) in humans.v" Four of the 9 dogs were

1156 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-31. Canine eosinophilic granuloma. Focal Harne figures and accumulation of
eosinophils.

Labrador retrievers. All dogs had an acute onset of erythematous macules that progressed
and coalesced into arciform and serpiginous plaques, especially on the pinnae and ventral
abdomen and thorax. Edema varied from facial to generalized and pitting. Numerous
possible triggering events were identified: drugs, new diets, arthropods, and concurrent
allergic or immune-mediated diseases.
Histopathologic findings included superficial and deep perivascular to interstitial dermatitis with marked dermal edema and vascular dilatation. Eosinophils were numerous,
and flame figures were seen in about half the specimens.
Seven of the 9 dogs were treated with glucocorticoids or hydroxyzine and recovered
in 1 to 3 weeks. Two dogs received no treatment: one recovered in 1 week, the other
continued to wax and wane .

• PANNICULITIS
Panniculitis is a multifactorial inflammatory condition of the subcutaneous fat, characterized by deep-seated cutaneous nodules that often become cystic and ulcerated and develop draining tracts. The disorder is uncommon in dogs and cats.'?'

Cause and Pathogenesis
The lipocyte (fat cell, adipocyte) is particularly vulnerable to trauma, ischemia, and neighboring inflammatory disease. In addition, damage to lipocytes results in the liberation of
lipid, which undergoes hydrolysis into glycerol and fatty acids. Fatty acids are potent
inflammatory agents, and they incite further inflammatory and granulomatous tissue reactions.
Multiple etiologic factors are involved in the genesis of panniculitis in human beings
(Table 18-1). Many of these factors have yet to be recognized in dogs and cats, but this
fact may only reflect lack of awareness. Hereditary deficiency of acantitrypsin predisposes
humans to panniculitis in response to various stimuli." aI-Antitrypsin protects the body

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 57
• Table 18-1

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF HUMAN
PANNICULITIS

INFECTIOUS

Bacterial," myobacterial," actinomycetic," fungal," chlamydial, viral
IMMUNOLOGIC

Lupus erythematosus," rheumatoid arthritis, drug eruption," erythema nodosum," arthropod bite"
PHYSICOCHEMICAL (FACTITIAL)

Trauma: pressure, cold, foreign body" (e.g., postsubcutaneous injection of vaccines or bulky, oily, or insoluble
liquids)
PANCREATIC DISEASE

Inflammation: neoplasia"
POSTGLUCOCORTICOID THERAPY
VASCUUTIS*

Leukocytoclastic, periarteritis nodosa, thrombophlebitis, embolism"
NUTRITIONAL
Vitamin E deficiency"
ENTEROPATHIES
HEREDITARY

aI-Antitrypsin deficiency
IDIOPATHIC*
°Recognized in dogs and cats.

against connective tissue degradation by the neutrophil proteases, elastase and cathepsin
G. Serum concentrations of aI-antitrypsin were found to be normal (1.62 to 2.43 mg/dl)
in nine dogs with sterile panniculitis." Infectious and nutritional causes of canine and
feline panniculitis are discussed elsewhere (see Chaps. 4, 5, and 17) and are therefore not
addressed here. This discussion concentrates on sterile forms of panniculitis.
Nodular panniculitis refers to sterile subcutaneous inflammatory nodules and is not a
specific disease. It is a purely descriptive term, clinically representing the end result of
several known and unknown etiologic factors.'?' Weber-Christian panniculitis has been a
frequently misused term and does not exist as a specific disease. In dogs and cats, the
majority of cases of sterile nodular panniculitis are solitary lesions of idiopathic origin. A
few cases of lupus erythematosus panniculitis and erythema nodosum have been recognized in dogs (see Chap. 9).4, 101 Panniculitis has also been described in dogs and cats in
association with pancreatic disease (carcinoma, necrosis). 92, 97. 99, 100 Eosinophilic panniculitis in humans has been associated with arthropods, injection reactions, and lymphoma.?"
Eosinophilic panniculitis is rarely described in dogs and cats 96 , 101 and could be associated
with arthropods and injections.
Clinical Features

Panniculitis is manifested clinically as deep-seated cutaneous nodules. The lesions may
occur Singly or in crops; they are either localized to specific areas or generalized, and they
vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter. Nodules may be firm and
well circumscribed or soft and ill defined (Fig. 18-32A). They are initially subcutaneous
but may fix the overlying skin as they progress. The lesions may become cystic, ulcerate,
and develop draining tracts that discharge an oily, yellowish brown to bloody substance
(see Fig. 18-32B and C). The lesions mayor may not be painful and often heal with
depressed scars. Hyperpigmentation may also occur around the lesions or at the site of
healing lesions. A report of pedal panniculitis in German shepherd dogs describes localized panniculitis proximal to the tarsal and carpal pads." We believe that these cases are
identical to metatarsalfistulation (see Chap. 12).

1158 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-32. A, Idiopathic sterile panniculitis in a Dachshund. Two subcutaneous nodules on the trunk.
B, Canine idiopathic sterile panniculitis. Subcutaneous nodule with multiple draining tracts. C, Feline panniculitis.
Multiple fistulae on the ventral abdomen. D, Idiopathic sterile panniculitis in a cat. Ulcerated nodule in the groin.
E, Juvenile cellulitis in a Golden retriever. Erythema, edema, exudation, crusting, and alopecia on the face and
pinnae. F, Same dog as in E. Multiple pustules in the ear canal and on the pinna. G, Idiopathic mucinosis in a

Chinese Shar pei, Marked thickening and folding of the skin. H, Idiopathic mucinosis in a Chinese Shar pet. Closeup of a mucinous vesicle.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1159

DOG
The majority (80%) of dogs have a solitary lesion, most commonly over the ventrolateral
chest, neck, and abdomen.l'" No age, breed, or sex predilections are apparent in dogs
with solitary lesions.
Dogs with multiple lesions often have constitutional signs, including poor appetite,
depression, lethargy, and pyrexia.v- 95, 101, 102 These signs are sometimes intermittent,
heralding a new crop of skin lesions. A rare dog has arthralgias, abdominal pain, vomiting,
or hepatosplenomegaly.t- 95, 97 In dogs with multiple skin lesions, the trunk is most
commonly involved. There is no age predilection, but female dogs may be over-represented. Although all breeds and mongrels may be affected, Dachshunds and Poodles
appear to be predisposed.v 5, 97
Dogs with pancreatic panniculitis have severe systemic signs (fever, anorexia, depression, vomiting, abdominal pain) and concurrent necrotizing steatitis (abdominal, mesenteric, pleural).92, 92a, 99

CAT
The majority (95%) of cats have a solitary lesion, most commonly over the ventral
abdomen and ventrolateral thorax (see Figs, 18-32D and 18-33A).lOl Cats with multiple
lesions often have constitutional signs as described for dogs. 95, 100, 101 No age, breed, or sex
predilections are evident.

Diagnosis
Sterile nodular panniculitis is most commonly misdiagnosed as deep pyoderma, cutaneous
cysts, or cutaneous neoplasms. Aspirates from intact lesions usually reveal numerous
neutrophils, foamy macrophages, and no microorganisms (see Fig. 18-33B).94 The presence of numerous eosinophils suggests arthropod- or injection-induced lesions. Sudan
stains may reveal extracellular and intracellular lipid droplets. Animals with multiple
lesions and systemic illness often have mild to moderate leukocytosis and neutrophilia,
mild nonregenerative anemia, and elevated U2, f3b and f32 globulin fractions on serum
protein electrophoresis." Direct immunofluorescence testing may reveal the deposition of
Ig and complement at the basement membrane zone." Animals with pancreatic panniculitis may have increased serum concentrations of amylase and lipase.
Panniculitis can be diagnosed only by biopsy, and excision biopsy is the only biopsy
technique that is satisfactory for subcutaneous nodules.v 5 Punch biopsies fail to deliver
tissue sufficient to be of diagnostic value in about 75% of cases. Panniculitis may be
lobular, septal, or diffuse, or it may have a combination of these characteristics.l?' In
addition, panniculitis may be granulomatous, pyogranulomatous, suppurative, eosinophilic,
necrotizing, or fibrosing.''" Thrombosis of subcuticular blood vessels, lymphoid nodules,
and radial fat crystals may occur. 101 The histopathologic pattern and cytomorphologic
picture of the reactions have little diagnostic, therapeutic, or prognostic significance (Figs.
18-34 to 18-37). Lipid-laden macrophages (lipophages) are often prominent (see Fig.
18-37B). It is imperative to realize that most panniculitides, regardless of cause, look
histologically identical. Thus, one cannot diagnose sterile nodular panniculitis from a
biopsy specimen. Special stains and cultures are always indicated to rule out infectious
agents, and polarized light examination is indicated to rule out foreign bodies. Tissue
cultures for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycobacterial cultures are negative prior to a diagnosis of sterile nodular panniculitis.
If the panniculitis is predominantly lymphohistioplasmacytic, with or without concurrent neutrophilic vasculitis or interface dermatitis, or if other clinical signs suggest lupus
erythematosus, other diagnostic tests may include antinuclear antibody and direct immunofluorescence testing of lesional skin (see Chap. 9). If vasculitis is present, the diagnostic
tests indicated may reflect the differential diagnosis of vasculitis (see Chap. 9). If panniculitis is persistent and refractory or if the patient shows concurrent signs of gastrointestinal
disease, pancreatic disease should be ruled out.

1160 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-33. A, A cat with
multiple panniculitis lesions on the
lateral thorax. Note the variation
in erythema, and one lesion has ulcerated. B, Canine idiopathic sterile
panniculitis. Cytologic examination reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation wherein neutrophils are
non degenerate, no microorganisms
are seen, and macrophages contain
numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles (lipophages).

Erythema nodosum is characterized histologically by a septal panniculitis and is
thought to represent a hypersensitivity reaction. I, 4, 5 Thus, diagnostic considerations should
include concurrent infections (e.g., bacterial endocarditis, coccidioidomycosis), neoplasia,
and drug reactions. One of the authors (DWS) saw a dog with recurring sterile panniculitis associated with the administration of an ivermectin-containing heartworm preventive.
Postinjection panniculitis is characterized by a discrete nodule that often has a necrotic center (Fig. 18-38A).3. 96. 103 Surrounding the necrotic core is a layer of macrophages and often multinucleated histiocytic giant cells; there is an outer layer of intense
lymphocytic and eosinophilic inflammation. In some cases, the presence of flocculent
foreign debris or shiny, amorphous-to-globular, bluish-gray-to-brownish material is virtually
diagnostic (see Fig. 18-38B).
Traumatic panniculitis is characterized by a large central focus of lobular fat necrosis."
Lipocytes lack nuclei but retain their shape, creating ghosts or shells of fat cells. Ruptured
lipocytes form large, cystic spaces. Interspersed and surrounding the devitalized lipocytes
are scant inflammatory cells, predominantly foamy macrophages. Eosinophilic panniculitis
suggests arthropod- or injection-induced lesions.P" 96
In humans, pancreatic panniculitis is characterized by virtually pathognomonic histo-

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 6 I

FIGURE 18-34. Canine idiopathic sterile panniculitis. Pyogranulomatous panniculitis.

pathologic changes: lobular and septal panniculitis with focal necrosis; anuclear, necrotic
lipocytes surrounded by a thickened, shadowy, acidophilic cell membrane ("ghostlike"
lipocytes), and basophilic material in the cytoplasm of necrotic cells at the periphery of
necrotic foci (saponified calciumi." These findings have not been reported in dogs and
cats with pancreatic panniculitis.P- 99. 100

Clinical Management
Careful surgical excision of solitary lesions is usually curative, 101 Dogs and cats with
multiple sterile panniculitis lesions usually respond well to systemic glucocorticoidsYI. 95, 101

FIGURE 18-35. Canine idiopathic sterile panniculitis, Pyogranulomatous panniculitis with
numerous foamy macrophages (lipophages).

1162 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-36. Feline idiopathic sterile panniculitis.
Marked lobular panniculitis and fat necrosis. (From
Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)

Prednisolone or prednisone may be administered orally (2 mg/kg q24h in dogs, 4 mg/kg
q24h in cats) until the lesions have regressed (in 3 to 8 weeks). Therapy should be
stopped at that point because many dogs, especially young dogs, experience long-term of
permanent remission. In recurrent cases, alternate-day steroid therapy may be required
for prolonged periods.
In a few canine and feline cases, good results have been obtained with oral vitamin E
(dl-a-tocopherol acetate), 400 IV q12h. 4 • 101 The vitamin E must be given at least 2 hours
before or after a meal for maximum effectiveness. In humans, oral potassium iodide has
been used successfully in cases of sterile nodular panniculitis; one of us (D.W.S.) has used
this agent successfully in two dogs. One case of pedal panniculitis responded to only
vitamin E therapy; vitamin E therapy had a steroid-sparing effect in two others." We have
had success with tetracycline and niacinamide in a few dogs (see Chap. 3).

• SUBCUTANEOUS FAT SCLEROSIS
Subcutaneous fat sclerosis has been described in a l-year-old male domestic shorthaired
cat. 104 An inguinal abscess had been treated by surgical drainage and antibiotics 5 weeks
prior to the appearance of a rapidly growing abdominal subcutaneous mass. The mass was
a firm, painless subcutaneous plaque that extended from the xiphoid process to the pelvic
inlet and laterally to the lumbar processes. The borders were raised and distinct, and the
normal overlying skin was cool, indurated, and adherent. The mass was large enough to
restrict movement of the legs. Differential diagnosis included neoplasia, panniculitis, and
nutritional steatitis. Results of a hemogram and serum chemistry profile were normal.
Bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. Oral treatment with prednisolone was not

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1163

FIGURE 18-37. A, Septal panniculitis in a cat. B, Numerous lipophages in a postinjection panniculitis
in a cat.

effective. Later, small subcutaneous satellite nodules could be palpated on the chest wall
cranial to the mass.
On necropsy, the abdominal subcutaneous tissues were thickened, fibrous, and adherent to the dermis. Histopathologic findings revealed extensive subcutaneous fibrosis with
minimal fat necrosis and inflammation. Within the subcutaneous fat, or within the fat-rich
interstitial tissues of abdominal muscles, were bands of septal fibrosis, fat cells of increased size (fat micropseudocyst formation), and lipocytes containing needle-shaped fat
clefts (fat crystals) (Fig. 18-39). Although a few scattered lymphocytes, histiocytes, and
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells were found, and although there were isolated foci of
neutrophils, the process was largely noninflammatory,
These findings are similar to two rare human disorders: sclerema neonatorum and
subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn.' The latter is mdistinguishable from poststeroid
panniculitis, but this cat had no history of corticosteroid administration.

• CANINE JUVENILE CELLULITIS
Juvenile cellulitis (juvenile pyoderma, puppy strangles, juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis) is an uncommon granulomatous and pustular disorder of the
face, pinnae, and submandibular lymph nodes, usually of puppies.v 107-109

1164 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-38. Postinjection panniculitis (rabies vaccine) in a cat. A,
Granulomatous nodule surrounding central area of necrosis and flocculent
foreign material (arrow). B, Close-up of A. Note shiny, amorphous deposits
of vaccine-related material (arrows).

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis are unknown. Heritability is supported by an increased
occurrence in certain breeds and by familial histories of disease." 107-109 The occurrence of
sterile granulomas and pustules that respond dramatically to glucocorticoids suggests an
underlying immune dysfunction. Special stains and electron microscopic examination of
tissues do not reveal microorganisms, and cultures are negative. lOB Attempts to transmit
the disease with lesional tissues have been unsuccessful. lOB

FIGURE 18-39. Sclerosing panniculitis in a cat. Fat crystal with radial configuration.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1165

Clinical Features
Puppies are affected between the ages of 3 weeks and 4 months, and one or several
puppies in a litter may have the condition. A 2-year-old Lhasa apso experienced adultonset juvenile cellulitis; we have also seen this in young adult dogs. 106 Although numerous
breeds have experienced the disorder, Golden retrievers, Dachshunds, and Gordon setters
appear to be predisposed.v v 107-109 The initial abnormality noticed by most owners is an
acutely swollen face, especially the eyelids, lips, and muzzle. Physical examination at this
time reveals striking submandibular lymphadenopathy. Within 24 to 48 hours, papules and
pustules develop rapidly, especially on the lips, muzzle, chin, bridge of the nose, and
periocular area. Lesions typically fistulate, drain, and crust (see Fig. 18-32E). A marked
pustular otitis extema is common (Fig. 18-32F), and the pinnae frequently are thickened
and edematous. Affected skin is usually painful but not pruritic. About 50% of affected
puppies are lethargic. Anorexia, pyrexia, and joint pain (sterile suppurative arthritis) are
present in up to 25% of cases.
Puppies occasionally have concurrent sterile pyogranulomatous panniculitis with firm
to fluctuant subcutaneous nodules that may be painful or fistulate. These nodules especially occur on the trunk or in the preputial or perianal areas.': 4, 107-109 Two Shetland
sheepdog puppies with panniculitis had neurologic signs consistent with spinal cord
lesions.

Diagnosis
In very early cases, the differential diagnosis is angioedema (see Chap. 8). However,
angioedema is not accompanied by marked regional lymphadenopathy or systemic illness.
After the dramatic inflammatory lesions have appeared, the differential diagnosis includes
staphylococcal dermatitis, demodicosis, and adverse cutaneous drug reaction.
Cytologic examination of papulopustular lesions reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation with no microorganisms (Fig. 18-40). Carefully performed cultures are negative.
Biopsies of early lesions reveal multiple discrete or confluent granulomas and pyogranulomas consisting of clusters of large epithelioid macrophages with variably sized cores of
neutrophils (Fig. 18-41).3, 5, 108 Sebaceous glands and epitrichial sweat glands may be
obliterated. In later severe lesions, suppurative changes in the superficial dermis, in and

FIGURE 18-40. Juvenile cellulitis. Cytologic examination reveals
pyogranulomatous inflammation
wherein neutrophils appear non degenerate and no microorganisms
are seen. Note neutrophagocytosis
by two macrophages (arrows).

1166 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-41. Juvenile cellulitis. Well-demarcated dermal granuloma from an early case.

around ruptured hair follicles, and in the subjacent panniculus are predominant (Fig.
18-42).
Total globulin levels and results of serum electrophoresis, immunoelectrophoresis, and
bactericidal assays are normal." Lymphocyte blastogenic responses to phytomitogens are
suppressed in association with a serum suppressor factor.v 105

Clinical Management
Early and aggressive therapy is indicated because scarring can be severe. Large doses of
glucocorticoids are the treatment of choice. Prednisone or prednisolone (2 mg/kg q24h

FIGURE 18-42. Juvenile cellulitis in a dog. Note diffuse cellulitis.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 67

orally) is administered daily until the disease is inactive (usually in 10 to 14 days). Dogs
with intercurrent truncal panniculitis may require a longer course of treatment to resolve
all lesions. Some dogs respond much better to dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg q24h orally). If
there is cytologic or clinical evidence of secondary bacterial infection, bactericidal antibiotics (cephalexin, cefadroxil, amoxicillin clavulanate) should be given simultaneously. Topical
therapy, especially wet soaks with aluminum acetate or magnesium sulfate (see Chap. 3)
are useful, but puppies often find the restraint and pain undesirable, and the struggling
and stress associated with the topical therapy become counterproductive. Relapses are
virtually unheard of.

• FELINE ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS WITH LINEAR
SUBEPIDERMAL FIBROSIS
This is an uncommon feline dermatosis.v 110

Cause and Pathogenesis
The cause and pathogenesis of this disorder are unknown. Trauma, injections, foreign
bodies, and infectious agents do not appear to playa role.

Clinical Features
Any age, breed, or sex of cat may be affected. Typically, lesions are solitary and occur
over the dorsal neck and shoulder area (Fig. 18-43). Crusted ulcers, 0.2 ern to 1 cm in
diameter, enlarge slowly over a period of weeks to months. No pruritus and pain are

FIGURE 18-43. Feline ulcerative dermatitis
with linear subepidermal fibrosis. Chronic nonhealing ulcer over the dorsal neck. Note the rim of
thickened skin that surrounds the ulcer (arrow; area
has been clipped).

1168 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE I 8-44. Feline ulcerative dermatitis with linear subepidermal fibrosis. Note the bandlike
area of subepidermal fibrosis of the
superficial dermis (arrow).

present, and affected cats are otherwise healthy. These nonhealing ulcers typically have a
thick, adherent, brown crust, and a rim of firm, thickened skin surrounds the ulcer.

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes trauma, injection reactions, bums, infections, panniculitis, and neoplasia (especially squamous cell carcinoma). Biopsy reveals ulcerative dermatitis
with rather mild, subjacent superficial perivascular to interstitial dermatitis. Eosinophils
are not a prominent inflammatory cell type. The characteristic finding is a linear subepidermal band of superficial dermal fibrosis (Fig. 18-44) that extends peripherally from the
ulcer to a distance of several pilosebaceous units.

Clinical Management
Either surgical excision or aggressive glucocorticoid therapy is usually curative. The recommended glucocorticoid protocol is 20 mg of methylprednisolone acetate/cat subcutaneously, every 2 weeks, until the cat is cured.

• PERFORATING DERMATITIS
An unusual perforating dermatitis has been described in cats. lll , 112 Multiple firm, conical,
hyperkeratotic, yellowish brown lesions, 2 to 7 mm in diameter, are present over various
areas of the body (Fig. 18-45). The lesions tend to cluster and form linear configurations.
The lesions cannot easily be scraped or pulled off. In one cat.!" pruritus and pain were
not features. In another cat,lll lesions occurred wherever the animal excoriated itself and
at the sites of suture placement after skin biopsy.
The differential diagnosis is that of a cutaneous hom (see Chap. 20). Biopsy reveals
superficial interstitial dermatitis, rich in eosinophils and mast cells, underlying a conical,
exophytic projection from the skin surface (Fig. 18-46). The exophytic mass consists of
necrotic cellular debris, strands of keratin, and numerous collagen fibers in varying degrees of degeneration. There is transepidermal elimination of collagen fibers, often vertically oriented, into the base of the surface mass (Fig. 18-47). Superficial and middle

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1169

FIGURE 18-45. Perforating dermatitis over the hip of a cat. Note
the linear arrangement of hyperkeratotic papules.

FIGURE 18-46. Perforating dermatitis in a cat.
Exophytic conical mass containing degenerate collagen, inflammatory cells, and keratin.

1170 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-47. Perforating dermatitis in a cat.
Vertical orientation of degenerate collagen fibers
projecting into the exophytic surface mass.

dermal collagen fibers show a segmental staining abnormality in sections stained with
Masson's trichrome. With this stain, collagen fibers stain homogeneously blue. In perforating dermatitis, the collagen fibers show segmental red bands. This staining abnormality
has been described in animals with cutaneous asthenia and acquired skin fragility; it
presumably indicates some kind of abnormality in collagen metabolism (synthesis, packing,
degradation).

Clinical Management
In one cat,l12 treatment with ascorbic acid (vitamin C), 100 mg q12h orally, resulted in
resolution of the lesions within 30 days. However, when therapy was stopped, the lesions
recurred within 8 months. In another cat, successful treatment also necessitated controlling the concurrent allergic skin disease.'!'

• FELINE ACQUIRED SKIN FRAGILITY
This is a rare disorder with multiple etiologic factors. It is characterized by markedly thin
and fragile skin in the absence of hyperextensibtltty.v 113-116

Cause and Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of the cutaneous changes is unknown, and the cause appears to be
multifactorial. Most reported cases have been associated with spontaneous or iatrogenic
Cushing's syndrome (see Chap. 10), diabetes mellitus, or the excessive use of progestational compounds.s 114, 116 However, isolated cases have been reported in association with
liver disease (lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, or cholangiocarcinoma), phenytoin administration, feline dysautonomia, or nephrosis.1l 3 - 116 In some cats, serum biochemical profiles and

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1 171

FIGURE 18-48. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Extensive area of fullthickness skin loss over the trunk of
a cushingoid cat. (Courtesy of R.
Rosychuk)

adrenal function test results have been normal, and no associated diseases were found at
necropsy.3.114

Clinical Features
Most affected cats are middle-aged or older. The skin becomes markedly thin and is
damaged readily by minor trauma. Extreme cutaneous friability leads to irregular tears and
the shedding of large sheets of skin (Figs. 18-48 to 18-50). The skin may become so
thin that it takes on a translucent quality. Partial alopecia may occur. The skin is not
hyperextensible.

Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis includes spontaneous and iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome and
diabetes mellitus; appropriate laboratory tests should be performed. Similar signs occur in

FIGURE 18-49. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Large, full-thickness
tear over the thorax of a cat with
cholangiohepatitis.

1172 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-50. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Remarkable thinning of
truncal skin with resultant easy visualization of the underlying blood vessels
in a cat with megestrol acetate-induced diabetes mellitus.

some cats with cutaneous asthenia; in these cases, however, the abnormalities are present
from birth. Whereas the skin extensibility index is a useful clinical tool for the documentation of cutaneous asthenia (see Chap. 12), its use is contraindicated in acquired skin
fragility.
Because of the extreme attenuation of the skin, biopsy is difficult. The tissue often
folds and twists as wet tissue paper does, and the dermis is severely atrophic. Dermal
collagen fibers are very thin and disorganized (Fig. 18-51).3. 114 Panniculus is usually not
present in biopsy specimens. The epidermis and hair follicles may be atrophied. Masson's
trichrome-stained sections may show the segmental staining abnormality of collagen seen
in cutaneous asthenia (see Chap. 12), but to a much milder degree.U! Electron microscopic findings may be impossible to distinguish from those of severe cases of cutaneous
asthenia (see Chap. 12).1 14

FIGURE 18-5 I. Feline acquired
skin fragility. Note attenuated, disorganized, and wispy collagen fibers.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 73

Clinical Management

Regardless of the underlying cause demonstrated, the prognosis is grave. Affected cats are
very difficult to handle without skinning them. Surgical repair is usually unsuccessful and
leads to more extensive damage. Early cases in association with spontaneous or iatrogenic
Cushing's syndrome have resolved when the inciting cause was eliminated.

e IDIOPATHIC DIFFUSE LIPOMATOSIS
This condition is extremely rare in dogs and cats." 5, 117 Adult animals are presented for
progressively enlarging skin folds, especially over the neck and trunk. The cutaneous
abnormalities are symmetric, but may be more severe on one side of the body than on
the other (Fig, 18-52). The skin folds are pendulous, thick, heavy, and blubbery. Skin
overlying larger folds may be thin, hypotrichotic, and traumatized from contact with the
environment.
Biopsy reveals a remarkable diffuse thickening of the panniculus (Fig. 18-53). Proliferating fat may resemble mature adipose tissue, with mucinosis only of interlobular septae
and with small numbers of primitive mesenchymal cells and lipoblasts around blood
vessels. In other cases, the normal anatomy of the panniculus is lost in a proliferative
mixture of normal-appearing and dysplastic lipocytes (Fig. 18-54).
There is no effective therapy.

elDIOPATHIC ACQUIRED CUTANEOUS LAXITY
An unusual dermal collagen disorder was reported in a 9-year-old male English setter-" in
which large folds of pendulous skin had recently developed on both sides of the head and
under the neck. The folds were composed of thin skin with a jelly-like subcutis, whereas
other areas of the dog's body were covered with normal skin. On necropsy, the dermis in
the affected areas was found to be only two thirds of the normal thickness, and the
dermal collagen bundles were smaller than normal in diameter, fragmented, and widely
separated by ground substance. The elastin was normal. The affected tissues contained
areas of necrotic subcutaneous fat and vessels with endothelial swelling and a decreased
lumen. No inflammation was observed. Vascular insufficiency was proposed as the cause.

FIGURE 18-52. Idiopathic diffuse lipomatosis, Remarkable irregular proliferation of subcutaneous fat
with resultant distortion of the body.
(Courtesy of L. A. Lima.)

1174 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-53. Idiopathic diffuse lipomatosis.
The skin is markedly thickened because of the abnormal proliferation of lipocytes. Note the complete
loss of the norma! lobular-septal anatomy of the
panniculus.

• IDIOPATHIC MUCINOSIS
Idiopathic mucinosis is rare in dogs and occurs almost exclusively in the Chinese Shar pei
(see Chap. 12).3. 120, 122o, 126, 127 The incidence varies from 4.8% to 5% (in Shar peis
presenting to a veterinary teaching hospital) to 12.6% (in Shar peis presenting to a
dermatology specialty practice),122, 123, 125 Abnormal deposition of mucin may be focal or
diffuse and may vary from mild to severe. Gross deformity of a leg occurred in one
case.123
Clinically, mucinosis may be manifested as generalized, thickened, puffy, nonpitting
skin. Thickened folds are often most prominent over the face, neck, and limbs (Figs.
18-55A and see 18-32G). Severe focal mucinosis is usually associated with some degree
of generalized mucinosis. Multiloculated vesicles or bullae may occur with the thickened
skin or as the only lesions (see Figs. 18-32H and 18-55B). When ruptured, these lesions
yield an acellular, clear, viscid, sticky, and stringy fluid (Fig. 18-55G). Affected dogs are
not pruritic, do not have clinically inflamed skin, and are otherwise healthy.
An unusual type of focal mucinosis was reported in a 5-week-old Chow Chow cross
puppy.119 The puppy had pruritic, crusted, papular, and plaquelike lesions on the head
and pinnae.
Idiopathic mucinosis occurs in young Chinese Shar peis that do not have pruritus or
clinically evident inflammation. Diagnosis is straightforward in such cases. A diagnosis may
be supported by pricking or puncturing the skin with a hypodermic needle. Stringy, sticky,
clear fluid oozes from the puncture site (see Fig. 18-55G),122 Confirmation is by biopsy,
which reveals marked diffuse dermal mucinosis and mild perivascular accumulations of
mast cells and eosinophils (Figs. 18-56 and 18-57). One study of Shar peis with idio-

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1175

FIGURE 18-54. Idiopathic diffuse lipomatosis.
Proliferation of often misshapen lipocytes.

pathic mucinosis and mucinous vesicles indicated that dilated, distorted lymphatics (factor
VIII-related antigen-positive) were a characteristic finding in most cases.P' Whether the
lymphatic changes are the cause or an effect of the condition is unknown. The mucinosis
of Shar peis results from the massive accumulation of hyaluronic acid and, to a lesser
extent, of chondroitins 4 and 6 sulfate and dermatan sulfate.t'"
Thirteen Shar peis with mucinosis and 13 normal dogs underwent cutaneous mast cell
density and mast cell subtype studies based on protease content. 127a In sections stained
with toluidine blue, normal dogs had a median mast cell density of 31.2Imm 2 , compared
with 9.1 mm- in Shar peis with mucinosis. The predominant mast cell subtype in normal
dogs was the tryptase-chymase-carboxypeptidase-cathepsin G subtype, whereas in Shar
peis with mucinosis it was the chymase-carboxypeptidase subtype.
Chinese Shar peis also experience localized and generalized mucinosis in conjunction
with hypersensitivities (e.g., atopy, food hypersensitivity, flea bite hypersensitivity) and
hypothyroidism. In these cases, typical signs of the primary disease are also apparent.
Some cases of idiopathic mucinosis in Chinese Shar peis spontaneously resolve, or
deflate, as the dogs age. Remarkable deflation also follows the administration of glucocorticoids.P" 122a, 126, 127 Triamcinolone has been effective in some cases with poor response to
prednisone. Pentoxifylline, 10 mg/kq q8h, was effective in a case that had been glucocorticoid-responsive but required chronic therapy.

• WATERLINE DISEASE OF BLACK LABRADOR RETRIEVERS
Waterline disease is a poorly understood condition of black Labrador retrievers of either
sex.v 5 Affected dogs present with severe pruritus, secondary seborrhea, and alopecia of

I I 76 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-55. A, Idiopathic mucinosis of the Chinese Shar pei. Note the remarkable thickening and folding of the
skin. (Courtesy M. Paradis.) B, Multiple mucin containing vesicles on a Chinese Shar pei. C, Note string of mucin
between the fingertips that was expressed from a small hypodermic needle puncture.

the legs and ventrum (Fig. 18-58) and, occasionally, of the head. Scrapings and cultures
are negative, as are responses to intradermal skin tests and hypo allergenic diets. The
disorder is poorly responsive to systemic glucocorticosteroids. Our recent cases of this
"syndrome," whether in Labrador retrievers or other breeds, have involved Malassezia
dermatitis and responded to ketoconazole administration (see Chap. 5). We seriously
doubt the existence of "waterline disease."

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 77

FIGURE 18-56. Idiopathic mucinosis of the Chinese Shar pei. Diffuse dermal mucinosis with minimal
inflammation.

• IDIOPATHIC PREAURICULAR ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS
OF CATS
A pruritic, unilateral to bilateral, preauricular ulcerative dermatitis was reported in a 3month-old kitten and two of its littermates.F" The condition was unresponsive to glucocorticoids, antihistamines, fatty acids, antibiotics, and hypoallergenic diets. Isotretinoin (10 mg
q24h orally) resulted in healing after 3 weeks. Further details were not given.

FIGURE 18-57. Idiopathic mucinosis of the Chinese Shar pei. Closeup of mucinosis and perivascular
mast cells.

1178 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-58. Waterline disease
in a black Labrador retriever. Note
remarkably well demarcated alopecia
and dermatitis of the ventral aspect
of the body.

• IDIOPATHIC ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS OF THE UPPER LIP
IN DOGS
A unique ulcerative dermatitis has been anecdotally reported in dogs. Well-demarcated
ulcers occur in the skin of the upper lip, below the nasal planum, and on the nasal
philtrum of St. Bernards and Newfoundlands.Pv Topical application of 1% cyclosporine
was an effective treatment. Further details were not given.

• COLLOID MILIUM
Colloid milium is a dermatosis in humans characterized by deposition of amorphous
material in the dermis.l- 129 It is classified into adult colloid milium, juvenile colloid
milium, nodular colloid degeneration, and drug-induced colloid milium. The adult form is
the most common and, although the pathogenesis is unclear, current opinion favors elastic
microfibrils as being the origin of the colloid. In humans, the lesions are discrete, translucent papules to nodules with an irregular "lumpy" surface.P? Lesions are typically multiple
and occur on the face, neck, ears, and dorsal hands. A gelatinous material can often be
expressed after puncture of the lesions.
Many years ago, one of us (D.W.S.) received biopsy specimens from two laboratory
Beagles. The dogs belonged to a group of Beagles, owned by a pharmaceutical company,
that were receiving an investigational drug. No details or clinical photographs were supplied. The lesions were described as multiple, asymptomatic nodules that oozed a gelatinous material when biopsied. The dogs were reported to be otherwise healthy, and
necropsy failed to reveal other abnormalities.
Histologically, colloid milium in humans and dogs is characterized by the deposition
of a homogeneous, pale-pink fissured substance within the dermis (Fig. 18-59).129 Fibroblasts are present within the colloid, but no inflammation is visible. The colloid stains
positive with periodic acid - Schiff before and after diastase digestion.
In humans, dermabrasion and surgical excision are the only effective treatments. 1. 129

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1179

FIGURE 18-59. Colloid milium in a dog. A, The dermis is filled with a homogeneous, pale deposit (colloid). B, Closeup of A. The colloid is fissured in many areas (arrow) .

• IDIOPATHIC GREASY SKIN AND HAIRCOAT WITH
SEBACEOUS GLAND HYPERPLASIA
We have seen a small number of dogs that have been presented for very greasy/oily skin
and haircoat. The animals were otherwise healthy, and the skin and haircoat were otherwise unremarkable. The dogs represented several breeds and both sexes; their "greasy
problem" was noted within the first year of life. Some of the dogs had an objectionable
odor as well.
Physical examination revealed a very greasy skin and haircoat. In longer-coated dogs,
the haircoat was clumped and matted with the excess grease (Fig. 18-60A). Skin scrapings and direct smears of the greasy material were negative. Histologic examination
revealed remarkable sebaceous gland hyperplasia (see Fig. 18-60B). Otherwise, the skin
appeared histologically normal.
Various topical therapies-degreasing shampoos (benzoyl peroxide, selenium sulfide)
and rinses (vinegar and water)-were of transient (48 to 72 hours) benefit. Castration was
of no benefit in two male dogs. It would have been interesting to try oral isotretinoin in
these cases, but the owners were dissuaded by the expense and possible side effects .

• SYSTEMIC PLASMACYTOSIS
Systemic plasmacytosis is rare in humans and is characterized by cutaneous infiltration of
mature plasma cells, polyclonal hyperglobulinemia, superficial plasmacytic lymphadenopa-

I 180 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases

FIGURE 18-60. Idiopathic greasy skin and hair coat with sebaceous gland hyperplasia in a dog. A, The hair coat is clumped and
matted with grease. B, Biopsy reveals hyperplastic sebaceous glands
in otherwise normal skin.

thy, and bone marrow plasmacytosis.P" The condition is unresponsive to therapy, and the
course is invariably chronic, but asymptomatic for years.
Systemic plasmacytosis was diagnosed in a 9-year-old Keeshond with waxing and
waning, ventral pitting edema and variable erythema.P? The dog also had abnormal claw
growth, mild lethargy, and gradual weight loss. Skin biopsy revealed a severe, deep
perivascular and periadnexal accumulation of mature plasma cells and a superficial leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed a polyclonal gammopathy and
elevated IgG levels. Five months of treatment with prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and
melphalan was of no benefit. The condition remained unchanged over a 3-year period.

• REFERENCES
General References
1. Freedberg 1M, et al: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New
York, 1999.
2. Griffin CE, et al: Current Veterinary Dermatology.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993.
3. Gross TL, et aI: Veterinary Dermatopathology.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1992.
4. Muller GH, et aI: Small Animal Dermatology, 4th ed.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989.
5. Scott DW, et aI: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co.. Philadelphia, 1995.

Canine Subcorneal Pustular Dermatosis
6. Clasper M: Successful use of gold in the treatment of
a case of canine sub-corneal pustular dermatosis. N Z
Vet J 39:65, 1991.
7. Grob
et aI: Role of tumor necrosis factor-a in
Sneddon-Wilkinson subcomeal pustular dermatosis.
J Am Acad Dermatol 25:944, 1991.
8. Kalaher KM, Scott OW: Subcomeal pustular derma-

n,

tosis in dogs and in human beings: Comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 22:1023, 1990.
9. McKeever PJ, Dahl MV: A disease in dogs resembling human subcomeal pustular dermatosis. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 170:704, 1977.
10. Takata M, et aI: Subcomeal pustular dermatosis associated with IgA myeloma and intraepidermal IgA deposits. Dermatology 189:111, 1994.

Feline Plasma Cell Pododermatitis
11. Canonge F, et aI: Pododermatite lyrnphocytaire quadripodale chez un chat. Point Vet 29:753, 1998.
12. Foil CS: Facial, pedal and other regional dermatoses.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:923, 1995.
13. Gisseleire Y: Preliminary results of a study of the
comparative efficacy of corticosteroids and chrysotherapy in the management of feline plasma cell pododermatitis. Proc Br Small Anim Vet Assoc 1994.
14. Cuaguere E, et aI: Feline pododermatitis. Vet Dermatol 3:1, 1992.
15. Nuttall T: What is your diagnosis? J Small Anim Pract
39:459, 1998.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • I I 8 I
16. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
17. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
18. Simon M, et al: Plasma cell pododermatitis in immunodeficiency virus-infected cats. Vet Pathol 30:477,
1993.
19. Taylor IE, Schmeitzel LP: Plasma cell pododermatitis
with chronic footpad hemorrhage in two cats. I Am
Vet Med Assoc 197:375, 1990.
19a. Yamamura Y, et al: A surgically treated case of feline
plasma cell pododermatitis. I [pn Vet Med Assoc 51:
669, 1998.

drome and eosinophilic leukemia: A comparison of 22
hypereosinophilic cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:
591, 1996.
38. Muir P, et al: Hypereosinophilic syndrome in a cat.
Vet Rec 132:358, 1993.
39. Neer TM: Hypereosinophilic syndrome in cats. Comp
Cont Educ 13:549, 1991.
40. Saxon B, et al: Restrictive cardiomyopathy in a cat
with hypereosinophilic syndrome. Can Vet I 32:367,
1991.
41. Scott DW, et al: Hypereosinophilic syndrome in a
cat. Feline Pract 15:22, 1985.
42. Weller PF: The idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome. Arch Dermatol 132:583, 1996.

Uchenoid Dermatoses

Idiopathic Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma

20. Anderson WI, et al: Idiopathic benign lichenoid keratosis on the pinna of the ear in four dogs. Cornell Vet
79:179,89.
21. Buerger RM, Scott DW: Lichenoid dermatitis in a
cat: A case report. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:55,
1988.
22. Gill PA, Purvis-Smith G: Idiopathic lichenoid dermatosis in a Doberman bitch. Aust Vet Practit 25:144,
1995.
23. Cuaguere E, Mialot M: Dermatite lichenoide idiopathique chez un Doberman. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 26:355, 1991.
24. Scott DW: Lichenoid reactions in the skin of dogs:
Clinicopathologic correlations. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:305, 1984.
25. Scott DW: Lichenoid dermatoses in dogs and cats.
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X.
W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1989, p 614.
26. Scott DW: Idiopathic lichenoid dermatitis in a dog.
Canine Pract 11:22, 1984.

Canine Sterile Eosinophilic Pustulosis
27. Berbis P, et al: Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
(Ofuji's disease): Efficacy of isotretinoin. Dermatologica 179:214, 1989.
28. Carlotti D, et al: La maladie d'Ofugi (pustulose eosinophilique sterile). Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 24:
131, 1989.
29. Craig IM: A case of sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in a
dog. Vet Dermatol NewsI15:11, 1993.
30. Kimura K, et al: A case of eosinophilic pustular folliculitis (Ofuji's disease) induced by patch and challenge
tests with indeloxazine hydrochloride. I Dermatol 23:
479,1996.
31. Mohr C, et al: Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis: Successful treatment with interferon-a. Dermatology 191:
257, 1995.
32. Scott DW: Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in the dog.
I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:585, 1984.
33. Scott DW: Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in dog and
man: Comparative aspects. I Am Acad Dermatol 16:
1022, 1987.
34. Scott DW, et al: Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis in the
cat: An unusual manifestation of feline allergic skin
disease? Comp Anim Pract 19:6, 1989.
35. Thomsen MK, et al: Impairment of neutrophil functions in a dog with an eosinophilic dermatosis. Acta
Vet Scand 32:519, 1991.

Feline Hypereosinophilic Syndrome
36. Harvey RG: Feline hypereosinophilia with. cutaneous
lesions. I Small Anim Pract 31:453, 1990.
37. Huibregtse BA, Turner IL: Hypereosinophilic syn-

43. Barnett SI, et al: Challenging cases in internal medicine: What's your diagnosis? Vet Med 93:35, 1998.
44. Houston DM, et al: A case of cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome in a golden retriever.
Can Vet I 34:121, 1993.
45. Kramer L, et al: Sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma syndrome and cutaneous histiocytosis in a dog: An immunohistochemical report. Proc Annu Congr Eur Soc
Vet DermatoliEur Coli Vet DermatoI14:193, 1997.
45a. Li N, et al: Identification of mycobacterial DNA in
cutaneous lesions of sarcoidosis. I Cutan Pathol 26:
271, 1999.
46. Panich R, et al: Canine cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome: A retrospective analysis of
29 cases (1976 to 1988). I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:
519, 1991.
47. Rothstein E, et al: Tetracycline and niacinamide for
the treatment of sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:540,
1997.
48. Scott DW, et al: Idiopathic sterile granulomatous and
pyogranulomatous dermatitis in cats. Vet Dermatol
1:129, 1990.
49. Scott DW, Noxon IO: Sterile sarcoidal granulomatous
skin disease in three dogs. Canine Pract 15(3):11,
1990.

Granulomatous Sebaceous Adenitis
50. Carothers MA, et al: Cyclosporine-responsive granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in a dog. I Am Vet Med
Assoc 198:1645, 1991.
51. Dunstan RW, Hargis AM: The diagnosis of sebaceous
adenitis in standard poodle dogs. In: Bonagura ID
(ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII. W.B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1995.
52. Gross TL, et al: An anatomical classification of folliculitis. Vet Dermatol 8:147, 1997.
53. Cuaguere E, et al: Adenite sebacee granulomateuse:
A propos de trois cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 25:
169, 1990.
54. Cuaguere E, et al: Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
in 7 Belgian sheepdogs. Proc Annu Congr Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 14:191, 1997.
54a. Cuaguere E: Adenite sebacee granulomateuse chez
un Akita Inu. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 35:47,
2000.
55. Martins C, et al: Sebaceous adenitis. I Am Acad Dermatol 36:845, 1997.
56. Power HT, Ihrke PI: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20:1525, 1990.
57. Power HT: Newly recognized feline skin diseases.

1182 • Miscellaneous Skin Diseases
Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coil Vet Dermatol14:27, 1998.
58. Prost C: Adenite sebacee granulomateuse: Etude retrospective de 13 cas. Proc GEDAC 12:255, 1997.
59. Renfro L, et aI: Neutrophilic sebaceous adenitis. Arch
Dermatol 129:910, 1993.
60. Rosser EJ Jr, et aI: Sebaceous adenitis with hyperkeratosis in the standard poodle: A discussion of 10
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:341, 1987.
61. Rybnicek J, et aI: Sebaceous adenitis: An immunohistochemical examination. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 539.
62. Scott DW: Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in dogs.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:631, 1986.
63. Scott DW: Adenite sebacee pyogranulomateuse sterile
chez un chat. Point Vet 21:107, 1989.
64. Scott DW: Sterile granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
in dogs and cats. Vet Ann 33:236, 1993.
64a. Stenn KS, Sundberg JP: Hair follicle biology, the
sebaceous gland, and scarring alopecia. Arch Dermatol 135:973, 1999.
65. Stewart LJ, et aI: Isotretinoin in the treatment of
sebaceous adenitis in two Vizslas. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27:65, 1991.
66. White SD, et aI: Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and results of treatment with isotretinoin and etretinate: 30
cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:197, 1995.

Localized Scleroderma
67. Bensignor E, et aI: Morphea-like lesion in a cat.
J Small Anim Hosp 39:538, 1998.
68. Bourdeau P, et aI: Observation d'un cas de sclerodermie locahsee (morphee) chez un chien. Rev Med Vet
167:1121, 1990.
69. Samlaska CP, Winfield EA: Pentoxifylline. J Am Acad
Dermatol 30:603, 1994.
70. Scott DW: Localized scleroderma (morphea) in two
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:207, 1986.

Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
71. O'Dair H, et aI: An open prospective investigation
into aetiology in a group of cats with suspected allergic skin disease. Vet Dermatol 7:193, 1996.
72. Mason KV, Evans AG: Mosquito bite-caused eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:
2086, 1991.
73. Moriello KA, et aI: Lack of autologous tissue transmission of eosinophilic plaques in cats. Am J Vet Res
51:995, 1990.
74. Moriello KA: Diseases of the skin. In: Sherding RG
(ed): The Cat: Diseases and Clinical Management II,
Vol II. Churchill-Livingstone, New York, 1994,
p 1907.
75. Paulsen ME, et al: Feline eosinophilic keratitis: A
review of 15 clinical cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
23:63, 1987.
76. Pentlarge VW: Eosinophilic conjunctivitis in five cats.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:21, 1991.
77. Power HT: Eosinophilic granuloma in a family of
specific pathogen-free cats. Proc Annu Memb Meet
Am Acad Vet Dermatol/Am Coil Vet Dermatol 6:45,
1990.
78. Prost C: Diagnosis of feline allergic diseases: A study
of 90 cats. In: Kwochka KW, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Boston, 1998, p 516.
79. Scott DW, et al: Miliary dermatitis: A feline cutane-

ous reaction pattern. Proc Ann Kal Kan Semin 2:11,
1986.
80. Song MD: Diagnosing and treating feline eosinophilic
granuloma complex. Vet Med 89:1141, 1994.
81. von Tscharner C, Bigler B: The eosinophilic granuloma complex. J Small Anim Pract 30:228, 1989.

Canine Eosinophilic Granuloma
82. Bredal WP, et al: Oral eosinophilic granuloma in
three Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Small Anim
Pract 37:499, 1996.
83. Brovida D, Castagnaro M: Tracheal obstruction due
to an eosinophilic granuloma in a dog: Surgical treatment and clinicopathological observations. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 28:8, 1992.
84. da Silva Curiel JM, et aI: Eosinophilic granuloma of
the nasal skin in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:566,
1988.
85. Fontaine J, et al: Deux cas de granulomes eosinophiliques oraux chez un Husky Siberien et un Malamute.
Ann Med Vet 134:223, 1990.
86. Norris JM: Cutaneous eosinophilic granuloma in a
crossbred dog: A case report and literature review.
Aust Vet Practit 24:74, 1995.
87. Poulet FM, et aI: Focal proliferative eosinophilic dermatitis of the external ear canal in four dogs. Vet
PathoI28:171, 1991.
88. Scott DW: Cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas with
collagen degeneration in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 19:529, 1983.
89. van Duijn HE: Drie gevallen van een oraaI eosinofiel
granuloom bij Siberische huskies. Tijdschr Diergeneesk 120:712, 1995.

Eosinophilic Dermatitis and Edema in Dogs
89a. Holm KS, et aI: Eosinophilic dermatitis with edema
in nine dogs, compared with eosinophilic cellulitis in
humans. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:649, 1999.

Panniculitis
90. Adame J, Cohen PRo EOSinophilic panniculitis: Diagnostic considerations and evaluation. J Am Acad Dermatol 34:229, 1996.
91. Aoki S, et aI: Nodular nonsuppurative panniculitis in
a dog. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 41:659, 1988.
92. Brown PJ, et aI: Multifocal necrotizing steatitis associated with pancreatic carcinoma in three dogs. J Small
Anim Pract 35:129, 1994.
92a. Campbell KL, et aI: Cutaneous markers of hepatic
and pancreatic diseases in dogs and cats. Vet Med 95:
306,2000.
93. Dahl PR, et aI: Pancreatic panniculitis. J Am Acad
Dermatol 33:413, 1995.
94. DeManuelle TC, Stannard AA: Difficult dermatologic
diagnosts. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:356, 1998.
95. Cuaguere E, et aI: Panniculite nodulaire sterile chez
Ie chien: A propos de trois cas. Rev Med Vet 164:
195, 1988.
96. Hendrick MJ, Dunagan CA: Focal necrotizing granulomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous injection of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases
(1988-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:304, 1991.
97. Hughes D, et al: Serum a,-antitrypsin concentration
in dogs with panniculitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:
1582, 1996.
98. Patterson S: Sterile idiopathic pedal panniculitis in
the German shepherd dog-clinical presentation and
response to treatment of four cases. J Small Anim
Pract 36:498, 1995.

Miscellaneous Skin Diseases • 1183
99. Patterson S: Panniculitis associated with pancreatic
necrosis in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 35:116, 1994.
100. Ryan CP, Howard EB: Systemic lipodystrophy associated with pancreatitis in a cat. Feline Pract 11:31,
1981.
101. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Panniculitis in dogs and
cats: A retrospective analysis of 78 cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 24:551, 1988.
102. Shibayta K, et al: Idiopathic nodular panniculitis with
systemic signs in a dog. Jpn J Vet Dermatol 5:10,
1999.
103. Stanley RG, Jabara AG: Chronic skin reaction to a
combined feline rhinotracheitis virus (herpesvirus)
and calicivirus vaccine. Aust Vet J 65:128, 1988.

Subcutaneous Fat Sclerosis
104. Buerger RG, et al: Subcutaneous fat sclerosis in a cat.
Comp Cont Educ 9:1198, 1987.

Canine Juvenile Cellulitis
105. Barta 0, Oyekan PP: Lymphocyte transformation test
in veterinary clinical immunology. Comp Immunol
Microbiol Infect Dis 4:209, 1981.
106. Jeffers JG, et al: A dermatosis resembling juvenile
cellulitis in an adult dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
204,1995.
107. Mason IS, Jones J: Juvenile cellulitis in Gordon setters. Vet Rec 124:642, 1989.
108. Reimann KA, et al: Clinicopathologic characteristics
of canine juvenile cellulitis. Vet Pathol 26:499, 1989.
109. White SD, et al: Juvenile cellulitis in dogs: 15 cases
(1979-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1609, 1989.

Feline Ulcerative Dermatitis With Linear
Subepidermal Fibrosis
110. Scott DW: An unusual ulcerative dermatitis associated
with linear subepidermal fibrosis in eight cats. Feline
Pract 18(3):8, 1990.

Perforating Dermatitis
111. Haugh PG, Swendrowski MA: Perforating dermatitis
exacerbated by pruritus. Feline Pract 23(6):8, 1995.
112. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: An unusual perforating
dermatitis in a Siamese cat. Vet Dermatol 2:173,
1991.

Feline Acquired Skin Fragility
113. Diquelou A, et al: Lipoidose hepatique et syndrome
de fragilite cutanee chez un chat. Prat Med Chir
Anim Comp 26:151, 1991.
114. Fernandez CJ, et al: Staining abnormalities of dermal
collagen in cats with cutaneous asthenia or acquired
skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9:49, 1998.
115. Regnier A, Pieraggi MT: Abnormal skin fragility in a
cat with a cholangiocarcinoma. J Small Anim Pract
30:419, 1989.
116. Zur G: Feline skin fragility syndrome in a cat with
hepatic lipidosis, In: Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. ButterworthHeinemann, Boston, 1998, p 495.

Idiopathic Diffuse Lipomatosis
117. Gilbert PA, et al: Diffuse truncal lipomatosis in a dog.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:586, 1990.

IdiopathiC Acquired Cutaneous Laxity
118. Pieraggi MT, et al: An unusual dermal collagen disorder in a dog. J Comp Pathol 96:289, 1986.

Idiopathic Mucinosis
119. Beale KM, et al: Papular and plaque-like mucinosis in
a puppy. Vet Dermatol 2:29, 1991.
120. Bomhard DV, Kraft W: Idiopathische Mucinosis Cutis beim Chinesichen Shar Pei: Epidemiologie, klinisches Bild, histopathologische Befunde und Behandlung. Tierarztl Praxis 26:189, 1998.
121. Delverdier M, et al: Les mucinoses cutanees du chien
et du chat: Etude histologique et histochimique a
partir de 106 cas. Rev Med Vet 146:333, 1995.
122. Griffin CE, Rosenkrantz WS: Skin disorders of the
Shar PeL In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XI. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1992, p 519.
122a. LOpez A, et al: Cutaneous mucinosis and mastocytosis in a shar-pei. Can Vet J 40:881, 1999.
123. Madewell BR, et al: Cutaneous mastocytosis and mucinosis with gross deformity in a shar pei dog. Vet
DermatoI3:171, 1992.
124. Mauldin EA, et al: More than mucin? Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coll Vet
DermatoI14:67, 1998.
125. Miller WH, et al: Dermatologic disorders of Chinese
Shar Peis: 58 cases (1981-1989). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 200:986, 1992.
126. Rosenkrantz WS, et al: Idiopathic mucinosis in a dog.
Comp Anim Pract 1:39, 1987.
127. Schafer H, Spieth K: Fallbericht: Idiopathische Muzinose bei einem Shar PeL Kleintierpraxis 37:403, 1992.
127a. Welle M, et al: Mast cell numbers and subtypes in
the skin of Shar Peis with cutaneous mucinosis. Proc
Annu Congr Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coll Vet
DermatoI14:179, 1997.

IdiopathiC Preauricular Ulcerative Dermatitis ofCats
128. Breen PT, Jeromin AM: A case of feline idiopathic
ulcerative dermatosis responding to isotretinoin. Dermatol Dialogue, Spring/Summer, 1993, p 6.

Idiopathic Ulcerative Dermatitis of the Upper Lip in
Dogs
128a. Rosenbaum M: Cyclosporine. Derm Dialogue, Summer: 1999.

Colloid Milium
129. Touart DM, Sau P: Cutaneous deposition diseases:
Part I. J Am Acad Dermatol 39:149, 1998.

Systemic Plasmacytosis
130. Gookin JL, et al: Systemic plasmacytosis and polyclonal gammopathy in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 12:
471, 1998.

Chapter

19
Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal
Sacs, and Ears

• EYELID DISEASES
The eyelids are complex folds of skin that are susceptible to many structural and functional disorders. This discussion is limited to diseases that affect eyelids and not the
eyeball, the conjunctiva, and the third eyelid, which are purely in the realm of the
ophthalmologist.

Anatomy
Canine and feline eyelids consist of an upper eyelid, a lower eyelid, a row of cilia in the
upper lid only, and a number of glands. 6 Meibomian glands (tarsal glands) are modified,
large sebaceous gland units that produce a viscous, oily secretion. Zeis' glands are sebaceous glands associated with cilia. Moll's glands are modified epitrichial sweat glands
associated with cilia. In addition, accessory lacrimal glands in the eyelids discharge tears
into the conjunctival sac and contribute to the precorneal film. The largest of these in the
dog is the superficial gland of the membrana nictitans, also known (erroneously) as the
Harder gland (or harderian gland).
The bacterial and fungal flora of the eyelids of normal dogs has been studied. 11, 14 The
bacteria most commonly isolated include Staphylococcus intermedius, coagulase-negative
staphylococci, and Corynebacterium spp. These are similar to the bacteria found on
normal canine skin in many other locations (see Chap. 1). However, fungi were rarely
isolated from eyelids, whereas they are commonly isolated from other areas of the skin.

Diseases
Because of the thin and delicate nature of the skin on the eyelid, its loosely attached
subcutis, and the presence of a mucocutaneous junction at the eyelid margin, the eyelid
and periocular area demonstrate exaggerated responses to numerous dermatologic conditions.P Because a normal eyelid margin is necessary for maintenance of tear film and
protection of the cornea, abnormalities of the eyelid margin often produce signs of ocular
discomfort and discharge. In addition, eyelid disease may result in abnormal tear composition, which may result in qualitative tear film disease.l? This may lead to keratoconjunctivitis and corneal ulcers. These signs can be the primary reason that the owner seeks
veterinary care.

BLEPHARITIS
Inflammation of the eyelid is termed blepharitis." 7 Often, a mucous discharge is apparent.
Many dermatoses may cause blepharitis or may be limited to the lids (Table 19-1).2,5
Some of these diseases are more likely to present with blepharitis only. In young dogs,
localized Demodex infestation may appear on the lids (Fig. 19-1A). Usually, only one eye
and only part of the eyelid are involved. Alopecia with minimal inflammation may be seen.
Periocular noninflammatory alopecia may also occur with topical ocular steroid reactions
but is usually diffuse. Every year, the authors see a number of cases referred from
1185

1186 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
• Table 19-1

DISEASE LIMITED TO OR THAT MAY FIRST
PRESENT AS EYELID OR PERIOCULAR
DERMATOSES

Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Bacterial folliculitis
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Juvenile cellulitis
Idiopathic periocular alopecia

Self-trauma resulting from ocular disease
Lupus erythematosus
Vitiligo
Periocular leukotrichia (especially in Siamese cats)
Solar dermatitis
Distemper
Topical steroid alopecia
Drug eruption

ophthalmologists because of chronic conjunctivitis and blepharitis due to atopy and, less
commonly, food hypersensitivity. Varying combinations of blepharitis with periocular alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and lichenification may result from chronic pruritus. Although
other symptoms may be found on close examination, they often go unrecognized by the
owner.
An idiopathic periocular crusting, occasionally associated with Malassezia or feline
acne, may be seen in cats, particularly Persians." Idiopathic facial dermatitis has been
described in primarily Persian cats and is characterized by scale and crust, and is often
periocular (see Chap. 12).4 Idiopathic seborrhea and bacterial folliculitis in dogs, and
dermatophytosis in dogs and cats (see Fig. 19-1B to D) may also cause scaling and
crusting periocularly. Immune-mediated dermatoses have a mucocutaneous predilection
and often involve the eyelids (see Fig. 19-1E to G). Other diseases are known for their
periocular distribution, although they are not limited to that area (see Fig. 19-1H) (Table
19-2).2
An idiopathic chronic ulcerative blepharitis, localized to the medial canthal region, has
been described in Dachshunds, German shepherds, and Poodles.' Biopsy reveals a diffuse
lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis. Response to topical or systemic glucocorticoids is excellent,
but therapy must often be maintained for life.
Ulcers and nodules were seen on the eyelids of a dog with neosporosis.? A proliferative mass at the lateral canthus was described in a malamute that was histologically a
pyogranuloma associated with Onchocerca Sp.9

ENTROPION AND ECTROPION
Entropion (inversion, or turning in) and ectropion (eversion, or turning out) of the lid
margins are best corrected by surgery. Chronic conjunctivitis or other diseases of the eye
that may result in distortion of the lids should also receive attention.

HORDEOLUM (STYE)
This is an acute, painful pyogenic infection of a sebaceous gland of the eyelid. Two types
are recognized. The external hordeolum (zeisian stye) involves the glands of Zeis and the
cilia on the outer eyelid. The internal hordeolum (meibomian stye) involves the meibomian gland in the inner surface of the eyelid. The internal type is the most common
hordeolum in dogs. Treatment consists of incising the abscess and applying an antibiotic
ointment. Appropriate systemic antibiotics are useful when the hordeolum is caused by
staphylococci.

CHALAZION
A chronic inflammation of a meibomian gland, a chalazion appears externally on the skin
surface of the lid as a painless nodule and internally on the palpebral conjunctiva as a
yellow, smaller nodule. The irritation from the inner swelling causes conjunctivitis. Treat-

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1187

FIGURE 19-1. A, Marked focal alopecia due to demodectic blepharitis. B, Hypothyroid dog with staphylococcal blepharitis. C, Ulcerative blepharitis in a dog with mucocutaneous staphylococcal pyodenna. D, Dog
with mycotic blepharitis due to Trichophyton terrestre. E, Ulcerative blepharitis in a dog with bullous pemphigoid. F, Ulcerative blepharitis in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. G, Depigmentation of eyelids in a
dog with uveodermatologic syndrome. H, Severe blepharitis in a cat with hypereosinophilic syndrome.

I 188 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

• Table 19-2

DISEASES THAT AFFECT THE EYELID OR
PERIOCULAR AREA IN ADDITION TO OTHER
SITES

Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus erythematosus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Canine familial dermatomyositis
Canine necrolytic migratory erythema
Erythema multiforme

Solar dermatitis
Vitiligo
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Drug eruption
Leishmaniasis
Vasculitis
Pemphigus vulgaris
Bullous pemphigoid

ment consists of incision and curettage of accumulated sebaceous material. Large chalazia
may be excised completely to prevent recurrence.

TRICHIASIS
This disorder is an abnormal position or direction of the cilia, resulting in epiphora,
mucous ocular discharge, and sometimes corneal vascularization and even corneal ulceration. Treatment consists of meticulous electroepilation of the involved cilia.

DISTICHIASIS
Animals with distichiasis display aberrant cilia on the lid. They may emerge from the
openings of the meibomian glands or the inner lid margin. Electroepilation is the treatment of choice. Distichiasis has been reported in Poodles, Boxers, Pekingese, German
shepherds, Cocker spaniels, Shetland sheepdogs, and Bedlington and Yorkshire terriers, as
well as in the Shih tzu, Pug, and St. Bernard.F'"?

EPIPHORA
Epiphora is common in Poodles (Fig. 19-2A). The cause may be atresia, blockage of the
nasal lacrimal system, or lid or membrana nictitans deformities." Surgical correction of the
lid problem or deepening of the lacrimal lake frequently permits improved function of the
lower puncta. Correction of possible causes of chronic lacrimation from ocular irritation
should also be implemented. In some cases of white dogs, the chief complaint is the
brown staining that may represent oxidized tears on the hair. Besides white Poodles, this
is a problem in Maltese and Bichon frise, Bacteria may playa role because the administration of tetracycline or other antibiotics decrease the brown staining in some cases. In
others, treatment with topical ointment blocks the chronic wetting or reaction of the tears
with the hair. Topical applications of hydrogen peroxide are useful for reducing the
staining of hairs.

TUMORS OF THE EYELIDS
These tumors are difficult to manage because of the problems with plastic repair after
surgery, or with protection of the globe if radiation therapy is contemplated. In dogs,
papillomas, sebaceous gland tumors, and melanocytic neoplasms are the most common
(see Fig. 19-2B) (see Chap. 20). Basal cell tumors, mast cell tumors (see Fig. 19-2C),
and epitheliotropic lymphoma (see Fig. 19-2D) are also found. A metastatic ocular tumor
that was believed to arise from a primary eyelid epitrichial sweat gland tumor has been
reported.P In cats, squamous cell carcinoma is, by far, the most common. IS A histiocytoma of the eyelid of a lO-month-old Afghan that regressed spontaneously has been
reported.'? Other sterile granulomatous or pyogranulomatous nodules have also been
reported in the eyelid." 20 In one case, the sterile pyogranuloma or granuloma was
responsive to tetracycline and niacinamide therapy.P

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1189

FIGURE 19-2. A, Epiphora. The chronic discharge of tears is common in poodles and results in brown
staining of the wet hair. (This phenomenon is seen anywhere that white hair is constantly wet.) B, Verrucous,
hyperpigmented sebaceous gland hyperplasia on the lower eyelid. C, Mast cell tumor. Alopecic pink plaque on
the upper eyelid of a cat. (Courtesy M. Paradis.) D, Epitheliotropic lymphoma. Depigmentation and erythematous papules on the eyelid of a dog. E, Bacterial paronychia with ulceration of the claw fold. Note the purulent
exudate at the base of the nail. F, Onychomadesis in a dog with bacterial paronychia and hypothyroidism. G,
Onychomycosis in a dog caused by Trichophyton mentagrophytes. Claws are grossly deformed, and there is
secondary paronychia in the central toe. H, Claw bed Malassezia in an atopic dog. Brown discoloration on the
claws in a dog with Malassezia paronychia.

I 190 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
• Table 19-3

NEOPLASTIC CONDITIONS THAT MAY AFFECT
THE EYELID OR PERIOCULAR AREA
Squamous cell carcinoma
Actinic keratosis
Melanocytoma and melanoma
Sebaceous gland tumors
Fibrous histiocytoma
Dermoid

Lymphoma
Epitbeliotropic lymphoma
Papilloma
Mastocytoma
Histiocytoma

In older dogs, eyelid tumors are common (Table 19-3).2 These can be adenomas and
adenocarcinomas of Zeis' and Moll's glands, as well as meibomian gland tumors. For
treatment, surgical removal is indicated when the tumor is on the palpebral junction and
touches the cornea. This can be accomplished by surgical excision, electrosurgery, or
cryosurgery. Tumors that touch the conjunctiva and cause irritation (and sometimes ulceration) must be removed. It is important to remove the entire tumor; otherwise, it regrows.
The surgery can be performed with a sedative (tranquilizer) plus local anesthesia. A small
V-shaped incision exposes the entire tumor for removal and can be closed with one or
two sutures. Animals with massive eyelid tumors that require removal of a large section of
lid should be referred to an ophthalmologist, because correct plastic repair is necessary for
proper lid function .

• CLAW DISEASES
Claws may be affected by many of the diseases described in this text. However, dogs and
cats presenting with claw disorders as the only dermatologic manifestation of disease are
rarely encountered. Such dogs and cats accounted for approximately 1.3% and 2.2%,
respectively, of all dogs and cats examined for dermatologic disease at one university
teaching hospital. 35 • 36
Claws and their disorders have received little attention in veterinary medicine. 34 - 36
Reviews on canine and feline claw diseases have been published.35• 36 The most commonly
reported types of claw diseases are asymmetric and result from known or presumed
trauma with or without secondary bacterial infection and onychodystrophy. The normal
microanatomy of the canine claw has been studied," but no in-depth microanatomic study
of claw disorders has been published. Further work is warranted, because chronic claw
diseases are debilitating for affected animals and frustrating for both veterinarians and
owners.

Anatomy
The claw is a specialized structure that is a direct continuation of the dermis and
epidermis (Fig. 19_3A).31.36 The distal phalanx of each toe has a crescent-shaped dorsal
process called the ungual crest. The dermis of adjacent skin is continuous with, and
extends distally from, this bony process as the periosteum of the phalanx. It has a rich
blood supply, which is the source of the profuse hemorrhage if the claw is trimmed too
short. The structures constituting the claw are compressed laterally and may be divided
into the coronary band, the ventral sole, and the lateral and medial walls. Most of the
claw is formed from the coronary band and the dorsal ridge. In many areas, the dermis
has fine papillae that project distally and interdigitate with soft epidermal lamellae.
The epidermis of adjacent skin is also continuous with that of the claw. The basal
layer of the epidermis, supported by the dermis, is most active in the coronary band and
dorsal ridge areas and causes growth in a circular fashion, producing a curved claw. This
is why the claw may grow around into the volar surface of the footpad. The horny walls
grow over the sole of the claw for the same reason. During the first 2 years of life, the

FIGURE 19-3. A, Midsagittal section through the claw of the dog: a, stratum corneum of the epidermis of the claw;
a', stratum corneum of the epidermis of the sole; b,b', deep, noncomified epidermal layers of the dorsum and sole of
the claw; c, corium (papillated in the area of the sole); d, claw fold; d', limiting furrow separating the sole from the
digital pad; e, skin with hair and glands; f, epidermis of the digital pad with stratum granulosum and lucidum, g, tubular
glands in the digital pad; h, articular cartilage of the third phalanx; i, meniscus; k, Sharpey's fibers from a tendon
insertion; I, ungual crest; m, fat cushion within the digital pad; n, lamellar corpuscle. (From Trautmann A, Fiebiger J:
Fundamentals of the Histology of Domestic Animals. Copyright 1952 by Cornell University. Reprinted by permission of
Cornell University Press.) B, Onychocryptosis with the claw growing back into the pad. C, Onychomalacia with the claws
soft and growing in the wrong direction. D, Onychorrhexis with longitudinal striations that have split the claw open, and
another digit with onychomadesis, the sloughing of a claw. E Onychogryphosis in a cat with hyperthyroidism.
Figure continued on following page

1192 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

FIGURE 19-3 Continued. F, Onychoschizia with splitting and lamination, longitudinal striations, and
breaking of the claw. G, Onychodystrophy, abnormal claw formation, may be seen following trauma,
such as in dogs that regrow dystrophic claws following onychomadesis, or in dogs with no known
previous damage such as this Welsh terrier.

claws of beagles grow an average of 1.9 mm per week, but this rate declines with age.
Rates of growth as slow as 0.8 mm per week have been reported. 21, 36
The epidermis of the claw sale has distinct granular and clear layers, as well as the
usual structures. However, the epidermis of the rest of the claw is largely composed of a
thick horny layer that consists of flat cornified epidermal cells fused into a horny plate,
with an absent stratum granulosum. On the ventral surface, the claw is separated from the
footpad by a distinct furrow. The sale is relatively soft and is compressible. A fold of
modified skin hides the dorsal junction of hairy skin and claw. This claw fold is free from
hair on its inner surface and produces the thin stratum tectorium that is the outer layer of
the proximal claw.
The claws of animals have important functions as prehensile, locomotor, and offensive
and defensive organs. A dog's claws should be kept properly trimmed for good foot health
and normal locomotion. Abnormal claws predispose the feet to trauma, strains, and
pododermatitis. Because of the long growth cycle, the correction of abnormalities may
necessitate 6 to 8 months of treatment.
A study on the microanatomy of the normal canine claw revealed that numerous
intranuclear vacuoles are present in the keratinocytes of the stratum basale and stratum
spinosum." Additionally, focal areas of subepidermal clefting were frequently seen. An
evaluation of normal cat claws has shown a variety of artifacts." Clefts were seen at
derma-epidermal junction as well as other levels. Intracytoplasmic vacuoles in keratinocytes (in contrast to intranuclear), pseudospongiosis (prominent interkeratinocyte spaces),
and apoptotic keratinocytes (2 to 3 per high-power field [HPF] in dorsal and ventral
matrices) were seen. It was suggested that the intracytoplasmic vacuoles may be an
artifact of occlusion, as had been previously suggested in the human literature. These
findings must be kept in mind when considering the diagnosis of inflammatory and
interface dermatoses, and dystrophies of the claw.

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • I 193

Certain terms are used specifically when describing claw abnormalities (Table 19-4;
see Figs. 19-3B to G).36 Many of these abnormalities may be seen together in the same
claw or in different claws of the same animal. Some conditions have little diagnostic
specificity, although others may. For example, leukonychia with no other abnormalities is
suggestive of vitiligo. Other changes that may affect claws include crusting or excessive
keratinous, waxy deposits on the claws, staining of the claws (often to a brown or red
color), and an abnormally rapid growth rate. Inflammation of the claw fold and distal digit
(paronychia) often leads to an abnormally rapid growth rate, which, in some cases, is
associated with onychogryphosis. Extension of all the claws and difficulty jumping to
elevated surfaces was reported in a cat with polycythemia vera. 26 Varying degrees of
lameness, pain on touch or palpation, pruritus, and regional lymphadenopathy may be
present.
Because nomenclature has not been rigorously followed when various claw disorders
have been reported, there is much confusing and relatively unuseful information in the
literature. For instance, onychodystrophy is a common sequelae of many claw disorders
(e.g., bacterial and fungal infections, autoimmune diseases, vasculitides, and "idiopathic"
onychomadesis), It may be more useful to focus on the earliest signs of disease. For
instance, dogs with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy begin with onychomadesis, and
usually respond to omega-6 or omega-3 fatty acids or tetracycline and niacinamide. However, dogs that develop onychodystrophy as a result of initial onycholysis do not respond
to these medications.

Diseases
A wide variety of diseases were shown to be associated with claw diseases in dogs (Table
19-5) and cats (Table 19-6). In addition, idiopathic onychomadesis, food hypersensitivity,
drug eruption, vaccination reaction, zinc-responsive dermatosis, and linear epidermal nevus have been described as causes of claw disease.P': 28. 37

TRAUMA
Trauma is the most common cause of claw disease seen in dogs and the second most
common in cats. 35 , 36 Usually, the trauma is physical, although chemical trauma due to
• Table 19-4

TERMINOLOGY FOR CLAW DISORDERS

Anonychia
Brachyonychia
Leukonychia
Macronychia
Micronychia
Onychalgia
Onychauxis (hyperonychia)
Onychia (onychitis)
Onychocryptosis (onyxis)
Onychodystrophy
Onychogryphosis (onychogryposis)
Onycholysis
Onychomadesis (onychoptosis)
Onychomalacia (hapalonychia)
Onychomycosis
Onychopathy (onychosis)
Onychorrhexis
Onychoschizia (onychoschisis)
Pachyonychia
Paronychia (perionychia)
Platonychia

Absence of claws (usually congenital)
Short claws
Whitening of claws
Unusually large claws
Unusually small claws, often shorter or narrower than normal
Claw pain
Simple hypertrophy of claws
Inflammation somewhere in the claw unit
Ingrown claw
Abnormal claw formation
Hypertrophy and abnormal curvature of claws
Separation of claw structure at distal attachment and progressing
proximally
Sloughing of claws
Softening of claws
Fungal infection of claws
Disease or abnormality of claws
Fragmentation and horizontal separation in lamellae at the free edge
Splitting or lamination of claws, usually beginning distally
Thickening of claws
Inflammation or infection of claw folds
Increased curvature of claws in long axis

Modified from Leider M, Rosenblum M: A Dictionary of Dermatologic Words, Terms, and Phrases. McGraw-Hill Book Co, New
York, 1968.

I 194 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
• Table 19-5

CAUSES OF CLAW DISORDERS IN 196 DOGS
NUMBER OF CASES

DIAGNOSIS

49
13
4

Bacterial paronychia secondary to broken or tom claw
Bacterial paronychia, one paw, idiopathic
Bacterial paronychia, four paws, secondary to hypothyroidism
Bacterial paronychia, four paws, secondary to hyperadrenocorticism
Bacterial paronychia, front paws, secondary to atopy
Bacterial paronychia, four paws, recurrent, idiopathic
Broken or tom claw
Neoplasia
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis (Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
Candidiasis secondary to diabetes mellitus
Blastomycosis
Geotrichosis
Cryptococcosis
Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus vulgaris
Bullous pemphigoid
Epidermolysis bullosa
Onychodystrophy, idiopathic
Onychodystrophy or onychoschizia secondary to seborrhea
Onychodystrophy or onychorrhexis, idiopathic
Onychomadesis, four paws, with atrial fibrillation

2

1
4
44
24
3
3

1
1
1
1
7

2
2
1
1
18
4
9
1

From Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claw and clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.

substances such as fertilizers may occur. Trauma most commonly affects one or just a few
claws (asymmetric claw disease). Occasionally, all four paws have multiple claws affected
(symmetric claw disease), owing to trauma such as that induced by excessive running on
hard (asphalt, concrete) surfaces and gravel. The resulting embedment of debris in the
distal ends of the claws may cause secondary bacterial infections. Clipping too closely can
also lead to injury from embedded debris or predispose the claws to secondary infections.
Contaminated clippers may also be a source for infection when clipping claws back to the
quick and may affect multiple claws in cases in which many are intentionally cut back.

• Table 19-6

CAUSES OF CLAW DISORDERS IN 65 CATS

DIAGNOSIS

NUMBER OF CASES

Onychodystrophy (idiopathic)
Bacterial paronychia secondary to broken or tom claws
Broken or tom claws
Bacterial paronychia secondary to feline leukemia virus infection
Pemphigus foliaceus
Bacterial paronychia (recurrent, idiopathic)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Bacterial paronychia secondary to acquired arteriovenous fistula
Bacterial paronychia secondary to diabetes mellitus
Bacterial paronychia secondary to iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
Dermatophytosis from Microsporum canis
Cryptococcosis
Sporotrichosis
EOSinophilic plaque (atopy, presumptive)
Hemangiosarcoma
Metastatic bronchogenic carcinoma
From Scott OW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claw and clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Educ 14:449. 1992.

23
9

8
7

3
2
2
2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1

1

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1195

INFECTIONS

Infectious causes of claw diseases are also common. Bacteria are most often incriminated
and bacterial infections should always be considered secondary (see Fig. 19-2E). A search
for an underlying cause should be made. If none is found, recurrences, especially when all
four paws are involved, are likely and a guarded prognosis should be given. Trauma is the
most common underlying cause. However, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes
mellitus, atopy, immune-mediated diseases, arteriovenous fistulae, other infectious agents,
and dystrophy may be responsible (see Fig. 19-2F). Onychodystrophy and other diseases
that scar and permanently damage the coronary band may result in defective claw growth
that predisposes the animal to onychorrhexis and onychoschizia. These sites may break
open and become readily infected. Purulent exudate within or under the claw is the
preferred source of specimens for cytologic examination or culture and susceptibility
testing.
Fungal infections, which are referred to as onychomycosis, may also occur (see Fig.
19-2G). Dermatophytosis, particularly Trichophyton infection in the dog, blastomycosis,
cryptococcosis, geotrichosis, and sporotrichosis have all been reported, although rarely.
Lesions are not usually confined to the claws. Dermatophytes invade the claw keratin and,
therefore, are usually associated with onychomalacia. Claws may be brittle and easily
broken or powdered. Malassezia infection may affect only the claws.P Generally, these
cases have mild paronychia with a brown, dry to slightly moist claw fold exudate that
attaches to the claw. The claw becomes discolored brown-red (see Fig. 19-2H). Often,
these are atopic dogs, and the paw pruritus, due to Malassezia infection, may be the only
symptom after successful control of the atopic disease.P
Parasites may also result in claw diseases. Demodicosis may be accompanied by a
paronychia that stimulates abnormal claw growth. Ascaris infection, hookworm dermatitis,
and leishmaniasis have been reported causes of claw disease. Leishmaniasis is most commonly associated with onychogryphosis. Hookworm dermatitis may produce rapid claw
growth, onychogryphosis, and onychodystrophy.
IMMUNE-MEDIATED DISEASES

Immune-mediated diseases often involve the claw fold, resulting in paronychia. In some
cases, other claw changes, especially onychomadesis, may occur, and less commonly, only
claw disease is seen. Symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy appears to be the most common
immune-mediated disease to cause abnormal claws (Fig. 19_4A).34-36 When claw disease
alone is seen, symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy, lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphigoid, and pemphigus vulgaris are the most likely immune-mediated causes. With paronychia or footpad involvement, pemphigus foliaceus is most likely the underlying condition
in both the dog and the cat (see Fig. 19-4B). Cryoglobulinemia, drug reaction, and
vasculitis have been reported to affect the claws.34 , 36 It has been suggested that vaccinations may induce sudden onset of onycholysis or onychomadesis, possibly due to vasculitis.24 Claw disease may appear several days to several weeks post-vaccination. Vascular
occlusion or ischemia may also result in claw abnormalities.
A form of vascular disease similar to Raynaud's disease in humans was recently
described (see Fig. 19-4C).25 Carlotti reported three middle-aged female dogs with this
condition. The dogs developed onychalgia, onychogryphosis, and intermittent acrocyanosis
of multiple digits and paws. Long-term therapy with the vasodilator, isoxsuprine, at a dose
of 1 mglkglq24h PO, was very helpful in controlling the disease."
SYMMETRIC LUPOID ONYCHODYSTROPHY

A symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy has been described in dogs.34 , 38 German shepherd
dogs appear to be predisposed. The condition was reported in two sibling Bottweilers.P"
The dogs' ages ranged from 3 to 8 years. Two other reports describe eight dogs with

I 196 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

FIGURE 19-4. A, Onychogryphosis in a dog with discoid lupus erythematosus. (Courtesy D. Carlotti.) B,
Onychogryphosis and onychomadesis in a dog with pemphigus foliaceus. C. A case of Raynaud-like disease in a dog.
(Courtesy D. Carlotti.) D, Squamous cell carcinoma of the claw bed. E, A Rottweiler that developed concurrent
claw dystrophy and vitiligo. Notice the depigmentation of the onycholytic claw. F, Idiopathic ceruminous otitis
extema in a dog. G, Nasopharyngeal polyp. Blue polyp protruding from the ear of a cat with chronic otitis extema.
H, Ceruminal gland carcinoma. Severe deformation and ulceration of the pinna of an aged cat.
Figure continued on opposite page

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • I I 97

FIGURE 19-4 Continued. I, Subungual hemorrhage in a claw of a dog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. This
suggests vascular damage. J, Claw biopsy from a dog with symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy. Active lesions show
lymphoplasmacytic hydropic and lichenoid dermatitis. K, Same dog as in J. Chronic lesions show pigmentary incontinence. L, Congenital supranumery claws on the hind paw of a yellow Labrador retriever. M, Horizontal band defects on
the claws of a dog, coinciding with the prior presence of a portosystemic shunt. N, Anal sac abscess in a dog.

lupoid onychodystrophy, of which three were Rottweilers and three were giant or standard
Schnauzers.A 24 All dogs were presented for claw disease and were otherwise healthy.
Typically, owners first noticed a single abnormal claw on two paws or more. However,
within 2 to 9 weeks, every claw on all four paws was affected. The initial clinical sign was

1198 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

usually a separation at the claw bed and sloughing of one or more claws. Subungual
hemorrhage was seen in some dogs (see Fig. 19-41). After the claws had been sloughed,
regrowth was characterized by short, misshapen, dry, soft, brittle, often crumbhng and
discolored claws. About half of the dogs exhibit lameness or pain, or both, on palpation.
Secondary bacterial infection may be seen. Histopathologically, the disorder is characterized
by hydropic and lichenoid interface dermatitis (see Fig. 19-4J and K). Direct immunofluorescence testing did not reveal a lupus band. Although most cases have been idiopathic,22,38
Mueller reported cases that responded to antibiotic therapy and that resolved with an
elimination diet. 33 • 37 Lupoid onychodystrophy may be a reaction pattern of the claw, with
several potential causes (e.g., food hypersensitivity, drug reaction, idiopathy).
Response to omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (Derm Caps, DVM Pharmaceuticals) or
systemic glucocorticoids is usually good. 22. 38 A limited number of cases are not fatty acid
responsive. 23 • 36 The combination of tetracycline or doxycycline and niacinamide administered orally (see Chap. 3) is often effective, and has been used successfully when fatty
acid therapy has failed.34 • 37 With successful therapy, chnical improvement is usually
obvious within 3 to 4 months and maximal in 1 year. When treatment is stopped, the
condition often relapses. 22 • 38

NEOPLASIA
Neoplasia may also involve the claw or the distal digit (see Chap. 20).21 Usually, one claw
is affected, although rarely multiple claws may be involved. Epithelial neoplasms are most
common and include squamous cell carcinoma, subungual keratoacanthoma, inverted
squamous papillomas, and atrichial sweat gland carcinomas (see Fig. 19-4D). Atrichial
sweat gland carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas in the claws of cats tend to be
aggressive. Melanoma, mast cell tumors, fibrosarcoma, osteosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, metastatic carcinomas (especially from the lung), myxosarcoma, and neurofibrosarcoma have all been reported. 21, 25, 27. 35-37

IDIOPATHIC ONYCHODYSTROPHY
Onychodystrophy is often diagnosed when multiple paws and claws are affected and other
causes cannot be determined. Again, it is important to include in this category only those
dogs that developed onychodystrophy as the initial clinical manifestation of their disease,
not as a result of onychomadesis, onycholysis, and so forth. These animals often have
secondary bacterial infections, so that improvement may be seen with aggressive antimicrobial therapy. However, recurrence after discontinuation of appropriate therapy is routine. Certain breeds appear predisposed and include Siberian huskies, Dachshunds, Rhodesian Ridgebacks, Rottweilers, and Cocker spaniels,"- 22. 25, 27, 34, 36 In a report of seven
dogs with claw disease, the three Rottweilers had symmetric lupoid onychodystrophy."
Cocker spaniels may have onychodystrophy as a manifestation of primary seborrhea. One
of the authors (CEG) has also seen two cases in Welsh terriers (see Fig. 19-3G). One
owner, a breeder, reported that a littermate had a similar problem, and other breeders,
anecdotally, reported the same. Old dogs are prone to idiopathic onychodystrophy. Dogs
with idiopathic onychodystrophy may respond to gelatin or biotin. Retinoids might be
useful here, but the authors are unaware of any attempts to use these agents.

IDIOPATHIC ONYCHOMADESIS
Idiopathic onychomadesis is also described as a problem, particularly in the German
shepherd, Whippet, and English Springer spaniels.F" 28, 34, 36 This may also be a problem of
the Bottweiler.P Most of these dogs have not had claw biopsies performed and, thus,
could actually represent a number of different disorders. In one case, a Rottweiler had
vitiligo and, concurrently, onycholysis (see Fig. 19-4E). These cases, besides having
onychomadesis, are characterized by frequent secondary bacterial infections under the
claw plate, onychoschizias, and onychorrhexis. The mineral composition of claws from 21
dogs with idiopathic onychomadesis (including 8 German shepherds) showed a Significant

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1199

increase in the concentrations of calcium, potassium, sodium, and phosphorus, and decreased concentrations of iron, manganese, and magnesium, as compared with 32 normal
dogs (which also included 8 German shepherdsi." The German shepherds with idiopathic
onychomadesis had Significantly decreased concentrations of iron, manganese, and magnesium. German shepherd dogs with idiopathic onychomadesis were Significantly overrepresented compared with the reference hospital population. Anecdotal informations" indicates
that German shepherd dogs with idiopathic onychomadesis may benefit from treatment
with pentoxifylline (see Chap. 3).

Miscellaneous Claw Disorders
Miscellaneous causes of claw disease reported or seen by the authors include epidermolysis bullosa, dermatomyositis, drug eruption, ergotism, thallotoxicosis, linear epidermal
nevi, nutritional deficiencies, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and necrolytic migratory erythema. Carlotti reported two young malamutes with paronychia and onychorrhexis
of all digits that had histopathologic findings suggestive of zinc-responsive dermatosis and
a dramatic response to zinc sulfate therapy." Carlotti also reported a linear epidermal
nevus in a dog, which was present since birth, which extended from the groin to two
digits of the paw." The lesion responded to the oral administration of etretinate. Another
situation that may occur is the development of permanent onychodystrophy after destruction of the basal cells of the germinative layers. Even though the infectious agent may be
eliminated and the underlying or primary disease is cured or controlled, the claw continues to grow with a permanent deformity. If this area is prone to cracking, resultant
infections may ensue.
Trachyonychia (lusterless, longitudinally ridged, and rough-surfaced claws) was diagnosed in an 8-year-old Rhodesian Ridgeback. 25a The claw abnormality had begun at 1 year
of age and affected all 20 claws. Pieces occasionally broke off the claws, resulting in
bleeding. Over the years, the dog had lost many claws, but they always grew back. Claw
biopsy revealed lymphocytic infiltration of the claw matrix.
Supranumery claws were present congenitally on the hind paws of a yellow Labrador
retriever (see Fig. 19-4L). Horizontal bands were seen on all claws of a dog (see Fig.
19-4M). These bands appeared 1 month after the treatment of a portosystemic shunt,
suggesting a disturbance in claw growth coincidental with the systemic disease.

Diagnosis
Because of the numerous causes of claw disease, it is obvious that a wide variety of
diagnostic tests, or procedures, may be needed. These are often determined on the basis
of history and physical examination findings. The history should include a thorough drug
history including vaccinations. Claw disease may develop 2 to 8 weeks following a vaccination. 24 In these cases or those suspected of a vascular etiology, the biopsy and work-up
should not be put off, because the diagnostic lesions may only be present early in the
course of the disease. When only claw disease is present, a simpler approach may be
warranted. In general, when only one or a few asymmetric claws are affected, the initial
work-up may be limited to a complete history, physical examination, and cytologic evaluation of collected exudate or debris. Material from within the claw fold or under the claw
should be obtained for evaluation. Cytologic examination is helpful in establishing the
presence of bacterial or fungal infection (suppurative to pyogranulomatous to granulomatous inflammation, degenerate neutrophils, and phagocytosed microorganisms), pemphigus
diseases (nondegenerate neutrophils or eosinophils and numerous acantholytic keratinocytes), and neoplasia,
If bacteria, yeast, or another cause is not identified, fungal cultures and skin scrapes
are indicated. The presence of intracellular bacteria supports a diagnosis of bacterial
disease, and trauma is the most likely inciting factor. If there is no evidence of neoplasia,
initial trial antibiotic therapy is indicated. When multiple paws and claws are symmetrically affected, or when antibiotic therapy is ineffective, a work-up for underlying diseases
should be begun. At this point, biopsy is often warranted.

1200 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

Biopsy may be the only way of confirming a diagnosis of certain claw diseases, such as
lupoid onychodystrophy, lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, pemphigus, pemphigoid, and neoplasia. Onychodystrophy, or idiopathic onychomadesis, should not be diagnosed without
biopsy, In many instances, punch biopsy specimens and those taken elliptically with a
scalpel fail to deliver the claw bed and, hence, the diagnosis. The claw bed is best
visualized when the third phalanx is removed with the intact claw and the entire structure
is sectioned longitudinally.v- 36 The simple submission of an avulsed or sloughed claw for
histopathologic examination is rarely of benefit. When affected, the dewclaw is often the
preferred claw to remove. A technique of biopsying the claw has been described wherein
a biopsy is taken by rotating a punch in one direction, cutting horizontally and medially
through the hom of the claw and then through the bone of the distal phalanx and laterally
through normal skin on the lateral aspect of the claw fold,32 Lameness was transient and
only seen when the front paw was sampled (not when rear paws or dewclaws were
biopsied), The authors still prefer the amputation of P3,

Treatment
Prognosis is most accurately established and therapy is most accurately instigated when a
specific diagnosis is determined. Bacterial infection, usually due to coagulase-positive
staphylococci, is treated with the administration of systemic antibiotics (which may need to
be continued for 4 to 6 months) and antibacterial agents and drawing soaks. In severe or
refractory cases, it may be necessary to avulse the affected claws under general anesthesia.
When avulsing claws, it is very important to try to preserve the underlying dermis (the
"quick"). If the quick is stripped away, claw regrowth may be abnormal or absent, and
concerns exist for osteomyelitis or avascular necrosis of P3. Onychomycosis, due to dermatophytosis, may be treated with long-term high-dose griseofulvin (50 to 75 mgikg q12h) or
ketoconazole (10-20 mglkg q24h). Treatment should continue until all damaged claw has
grown out and been trimmed off. This may take as long as 6 months, an expensive
proposition in large dogs. Antifungal soaks may make the patient feel better and decrease
contagion but are not effective therapy. Avulsing the claws may slightly speed resolution.
Some cases continue to recur, and if so, surgical declawing may be preferred. Idiopathic
recurrent onychodystrophy and onychomadesis are often benefited by surgery if medical
therapy is ineffective or too costly. Onychectomy has good results if the extensor and
flexor tendons are apposed over the distal end of the second phalanx, as has been
described." This is also used as primary treatment in some cases, because of the cost of
medical therapy and the likelihood of recurrences. Cases with permanent deformities may
be prone to reinfection, and topical acrylic nail cements may be needed to protect the
damaged area. The alternative is surgical de clawing.
Perhaps the most frustrating cases are those with symmetric onychodystrophy with
onychorrhexis, onychoschizia, and brittle claws in which the cause cannot be determined.
In such cases, prophylactic trimming and filing of the claws and frequent application of
acrylic nail cement can be helpful in preventing onychaschizia, onychalgia, and secondary
bacterial infection. Trial therapy with omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids or tetracycline and
niacinamide is indicated. Some cases may respond to long-term, repeated administration
of gelatin; however, dystrophic changes recur when therapy is stopped. Gelatin is dosed
empirically at 10 grains (one capsule) every 12 hours in Dachshunds." Alternatively, one
packet of Knox gelatin per 7 kg every 24 hours may be administered orally." These dogs
should receive good-quality, high-protein diets. Biotin has been reported to be deficient,
at least in some dogs, and, therefore, may be a useful treatment (5 mglkglday orallyl.f?

• ANAL SAC DISEASES
Anatomy
Anal sacs are paired invaginations of the skin located between the internal and external
sphincters of the anus. 40, 41, 45, 49 Each sac is connected to the surface by a single duct

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1201

(about 3 to 10 mm long) that opens at the mucocutaneous junction of the anus of the
dog, but that opens on a pyramidal prominence 0.25 em lateral to the anus of the cat.
The walls of the sacs contain fibrous connective tissue and abundant large sebaceous
glands, but the fundic portion of the canine sac has numerous epitrichial sweat glands.
The sacs and ducts are lined with keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium. The secretion of these glands is a mixture of fatty and serous materials and cellular debris. The
color and consistency of the secretion of these glands in normal dogs is variable, although
often it is a brownish, oily fluid." The anal sac secretion has a characteristic disagreeable
odor when expressed or when infection or impaction occurs (Table 19-7). The odor or
the fluid may have a function in social recognition among dogs. Anal sacs are probably
vestigial structures that the ancestors of dogs and cats used as a spraying defense mechanism similar to that used by the skunk. Normally, defecation causes compression of the
sacs and expression of some of their contents. The anal sac is sometimes called the anal
gland, which is an erroneous term that should not be used. There are, however, multiple
circumanal (perianal) glands in the cutaneous border of the anus, and modified sebaceous
and apocrine cells in the lining and ducts of the anal sacs. The exact function of the anal
sacs is unknown, and they are unnecessary for good health.

Diseases
Anal sac problems occur more frequently in smaller breeds (weighing less than 15 kg),
especially Poodles (miniature and toy), Chihuahuas, and seborrheic Cocker and English
Springer spaniels. They are less common in German shepherds and giant breeds. There is
no sex or age predisposition. The overall incidence was 2% among the animals examined
in a nonreferral hospital.s' An incidence as high as 12% has been described.t"
Anal sac impaction is the most common problem. The distended sacs can often be
palpated just lateral to and below the midpoint of the anus (at 4 o'clock and 8 o'clock
positions). The exact etiology is unknown. However, change in character of the secretion, oversecretion, or change in the muscle tone or fecal form may cause overfilling
of the sacs, plUgging of the ducts with resulting fermentation, inflammation, and infection. Retention may be secondary to obesity or intestinal disorders, inflammatory bowel
disease, or diarrhea.s? Impaction and chronic infections may have a prolonged course
(months) with many periods of quiescence and exacerbation. Following expression of the
sacs the signs should at least temporarily resolve in contrast to anal pruritus from other
causes.
Anal sac infections may occur as a result of chronic or recurrent impactions. It
has also been suggested that incomplete emptying of the anal sac, obesity, fecal contamination, low tail attachment, and chronic bowel disease may lead to secondary infection.P" The most common bacteria isolated are Escherichia coli, Streptococcus faecalis,
Clostridium welchii, 'and Proteus/" Staphylococcus may also be associated with infected
anal sacs." Malassezia pachydermatis is frequently isolated from normal and abnormal
anal sacs.42 , 44 Adequate studies to define what criteria should be met to determine a
diagnosis of infection are not readily available. Cytology of anal sac contents with the
presence of inflammatory cells with intracellular bacteria would be a minimum requirement.

• Table 19-7

ANAL SAC SECRETIONS

COLOR

CONSISTENCY

ODOR

DISEASE PROCESS

Straw

Thin liquid with small brownish flecks, or thick
liquid pus
Medium-thick liquid
Oily thick paste
Dry paste
Dry or thick liquid

Pungent

None

Fetid
Fetid
Mild
Mild

Infection
Infection
Impaction
Chronic impaction

Greenish yellow
Red
Clay
Black

1202 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

Anal sac abscess occurs as the result of an infection, which is often associated with
some degree of impaction. The ruptured sac releases the infection, and secretion into the
surrounding tissue results in cellulitis and possible fistula formation (see Fig. 19-4N).
Anal sac neoplasia may also occur and most commonly is an adenocarcinoma (see
Chap. 20). Older females are overrepresented. Clinical signs may be minimal or unapparent except for a mass or swelling in the perianal area.f" Tenesmus, constipation, and
polyuria and polydipsia are more commonly seen than typical signs of anal sac impaction
or infection.t?
Clinical Features
Abnormalities of the anal sacs cause scooting, licking, biting, or rubbing the anus, and
pyotraumatic dermatitis from self-trauma may result in the surrounding region. These
signs are not specific for anal sac disease and may be seen with any anal pruritic disease
such as atopy, food hypersensitivity, psychogenic anal licking, vulvar fold dermatitis, tail
fold dermatitis, vaginitis, proctitis and perianal fistulae. 40, 46 Cats rarely scoot but typically
cause traumatic alopecia of the tailhead and/or caudal abdominal areas. Infected anal sacs
may rupture, resulting in cellulitis with localized erythema, swelling, and pain, and a
subsequent draining fistulous tract may occur 1 to 2 cm lateral to the anus. The abscess is
usually unilateral, and the course is short (7 to 10 days). A foul-smelling odor may be
noted by the owners or on examination without expressing the sacs. Infected anal sacs are
a focus of infection that has the potential for several untoward results. Some veterinarians
are convinced that dogs licking the anal region in such cases transfer infection to the
mouth with resultant tonsillitis, pharyngitis, and gagging, and only treatment of both areas
(anal sacs and pharynx) has produced good results. In other cases, anal sac infection may
be the source of antigen in dogs with widespread bacterial hypersensitivity."
Clinical Management
IMPACTIONS

Feline impactions usually occur without infection, and manual expression (by lateral
external compression) usually relieves clinical signs for a relatively long time. 43 • 48
Canine impactions tend to recur. They should be gently but thoroughly expressed.
This may have to be repeated several times at weekly intervals by gently placing a gloved
finger in the posterior rectum and compressing the sac between the finger and the thumb
(positioned lateral to the distended sac). A fetid brownish yellow or black discharge is
expressed. If recurrence is frequent, irrigation should be performed as for chronically
infected anal sacs.
INFECTED ANAL SACS

Chronically infected anal sacs should be treated as any infection-by drainage. This need
not be surgical. Frequent expression of the purulent or bloody exudate followed by
instillation of an antibiotic solution may be curative. Inferior results are often obtained
with this method because the tenderness of the region precludes thorough treatment. It is
preferable to anesthetize the patient lightly and to lavage both sacs thoroughly with
lactated Ringer's solution, using a blunt needle or cannula attached to a syringe. Ceruminolytic agents such as hexamethyltetracosane (Cerumene, EVSCO) may also be useful as
lavage fluids. After the sac is thoroughly flushed, it is important to instill an antibiotic
cream, nitrofurazone solution, or a lotion containing antibiotic and corticosteroid in a
ceruminolytic base (e.g., Liquichlor, EVSCO). This may be repeated in 5 to 7 days. If
yeasts are involved, a solution containing nystatin (Panolog, Fort Dodge) or clotrimazole
(Otomax, Schering-Plough) may be used. If recurrence develops after the initial response,
surgical removal of the sacs is indicated.

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1203

An acutely infected anal sac (abscess) must be treated by liberal incision at the point
of localization and by curettage and application of 5% to 7% iodine solution (Lugol's
solution, Butler). Healing occurs by granulation. If the anal sac abscess does not heal with
the above-mentioned treatments or if it recurs repeatedly, surgical excision of the anal
sacs is indicated.

• EXTERNAL EAR DISEASES

Anatomy and Physiology
The primary purpose of the external ear canal and pinnae is to collect sound waves and
transmit them to the tympanic membrane. In normal young dogs, air-conducted stimuli
are detected at 0 to 10 decibels (dB) and bone-conducted stimuli are detected at 50 to 60
dB.152 The pinnae and vertical canal is the part formed with the auricular cartilage. At the
external orifice of the ear, the auricular cartilage begins to roll into a funnel shape, which
becomes tube shaped as it reaches down into the lower portions of the ear canal. The
external ear canal is variable in length (5 to 10 em) and classically divided into the vertical
and horizontal portions." The vertical portion originates from the pinnae and extends in a
rostral ventral direction before bending medially (horizontal canal) and continuing until it
reaches the tympanic membrane. The lumen is 0.5 to 1 em in diameter." Shar peis have
an ear canal of small diameter compared with other dog breeds.v'? This is especially true
of the vertical ear canal. The cartilage structures and the bony external acoustic process
are lined by skin (Fig. 19-5).
The skin lining the ear canal normally is a relatively smooth surface and, similar to

FIGURE 19-5. Schematic diagram of the anatomy of the ear. (Courtesy of CLIVE, Univ. of Edinburgh).

1204 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
most body regions, has a thin epidermis and dermis that contains adnexa (hair follicles,
and sebaceous and ceruminal glands). The vertical canal has relatively more adnexa than
the horizontal canal. To date, breed differences in the amount of sebaceous glands have
not been shown, although ceruminal (apocrine) gland and hair follicle density does differ. 144 An association between the development of otitis externa and ceruminal gland
density has also been shown.r"
The skin and adnexa are constantly producing exfoliating cells and glandular secretions. This material forms the earwax and cerumen that is believed to play some protective role. Canine immunoglobulins A, G, and M have been identified in canine cerumen/"
IgG is the predominant immunoglobulin found in both normal and inflamed ears with its
relative concentration significantly increasing in diseased ears. The ear canal has a clearing
mechanism. The movement of the epidermis, epithelial cell migration, clears out the
epithelial cells and glandular secretions (cerumen), and trapped dirt and debris. 91 , 151a
The tympanic membrane is an epithelial structure that separates the external ear
laterally from the middle ear cavity located medially. The normal tympanic membrane
when viewed from the external ear canal during an otoscopic examination is a concave,
translucent membrane, although there is a white C-shaped area in the dorsal part (Fig.
19-6). This corresponds to the attachment of the manubrium of the malleus bone. For
descriptive purposes, the tympanic membrane is divided into two parts: the pars flaccida
and pars tensa. The pars flaccida is the smaller part that lies next to the manubrium. The
pars tens a is the ventral portion that ends at the most distal point of the tympanic
membrane. This region may be difficult to visualize by otoscopic examination.
The middle ear consists of the tympanic cavity and walls, medial wall of the tympanic
membrane, the auditory ossicles and associated ligaments, muscles and nerves (chorda
tympani and other smaller nerves), and the auditory tube. In the normal ear, the only
communication from the middle ear to the outside environment is through the auditory
tube, which opens into the nasal pharynx. The tympanic cavity is divided into three parts:
dorsal, middle, and ventral. The dorsal is the smallest and contains the head of the
malleus and the incus, The middle part, also called tympanic cavity proper, is adjacent to
the tympanic membrane. The auditory tube opens in the middle portion of the tympanic
cavity. The ventral portion is the tympanic bulla and is the largest portion. The tympanic
bulla is somewhat egg shaped, with the dorsal aspect open to communicate with the
middle part. When otitis media is present, this part acts as a reservoir to trap the debris
and toxins. This portion also has the poorest access and, even with a ruptured tympanum,
cannot be adequately examined by otoscopy. Structures running close to or in channels
along the middle ear include the facial nerve, vagus nerve, and carotid and lingual
arteries.

Otitis Externa
Otitis externa is inflammation of the ear canal, which may result from numerous causes.
The most relevant classification scheme divides the causes of otitis externa into predisposing, primary, secondary, and perpetuating (Table 19_8).61. 79, 118, 151a In every case, the
clinician should identify as many causes and factors as possible that may contribute to the
otitis. Most chronic cases have at least one primary and several other causes or factors
present. Failure to recognize and correct one or more of these causes may lead to
treatment failures.

PREDISPOSING FACTORS
Predisposing factors increase the risk of developing otitis extema.t!: 52, 151a They work in
conjunction with primary causes, secondary causes, or perpetuating factors to cause clinical disease. The most successful management of otitis externa necessitates that they be
recognized and controlled whenever possible.
Ear type has been reported to predispose the animal to otitis externa by altering the
microclimate.P: 84 Climatic factors do appear to playa role because the incidence of otitis

FIGURE 19-6. Fiberoptic videoscope views of ears. A, Normal tympanic membrane, some hairs, and cerumen. B,
Ear mites and excessive cerumen. (Courtesy L. Gotthelf). C, Horizontal ear canal with proliferative changes seen as
papules and folds in contrast to a normal smooth lining. D, Deep horizontal ear canal with proliferative changes,
erythema, and multiple ulcers. The ability to make photographic records of a case is an advantage of the otic
videoscope. E, Tympanic membrane and manubrium of the malleus clearly visible, and a catheter points to the
highest level at which a myringotomy should be performed. F, Feeding tube down an exudative ear canal showing an
accumulation of pus and debris and an air bubble being cleaned out of the canal.

1206 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

• Table 19-8

FACTORS AND CAUSES OF OTITIS EXTERNA

PREDISPOSING FACTORS
Conformation

Excessive moisture
Excessive cerumen production
Treatment effects

Obstructive ear disease

Systemic disease

Stenotic canals
Hair in canals
Pendulous pinnae
Hairy concave pinnae
Swimmer's ear
High-humidity climate
Overactive glands
Trauma from cotton applicators
Irritant topicals
Superinfections by altering normal microHora
Neoplasms
Polyps
Granulomas (infections, foreign body, sterile)
Immune suppression or viral disease
Debilitation
Catabolic states

PRIMARY CAUSES
Parasites

Microorganisms
Hypersensitivity diseases

Keratinization disorders

Foreign bodies

Glandular disorders

Autoimmune diseases

Viral diseases
Miscellaneous conditions

Otodectes cynotis
Demodex canis, D. cati, Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati
Chiggers (especially Eutrombicula)
Flies (especially Stomoxys calcitrans)
Ticks (especially Otobius megnini)
Fleas (especially Echidnophaga gallinacea and Spilopsylla cuniculi)
Dermatophytes
Sporothrix schenckii
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
Contact hypersensitivity
Drug reactions
Primary idiopathic seborrhea
Hypothyroidism
Sex hormone imbalances
Lipid-related conditions
Plants (especially foxtails)
Hair
Sand, dirt
Hardened medications and secretions
Ceruminal gland hyperplasia
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia or hypoplasia
Altered secretion rate
Altered type of secretions
Lupus erythematosus
Pemphigus foliaceus
Pemphigus erythematosus
Cold agglutinin disease
Canine distemper
Solar dermatitis
Frostbite
Vasculitis, vasculopathy
Juvenile cellulitis
Eosinophilic dermatitis or granuloma
Sterile eosinophilic folliculitis
Aural chondritis

SECONDARY CAUSES
Bacteria

Staphylococcus intermedius
Proteus sp.
Pseudomonas sp.
Escherichia sp.
Klebsiella sp.
Table continued on opposite page

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1207
• Table 19-8

FACTORS AND CAUSES OF OTITIS EXTERNA
(Continued)

Yeast
Topical reactions
Foreign bodies

Malassezia pachydermatis
Candida albicans
Abnormal skin required
Small or microscopic

PERPETUATING FACTORS

Pathologic responses

Tympanic membrane changes

Middle ear cavity

Epidermal
Altered epithelial cell migration
Hyperkeratosis
Hyperplasia
Epithelial folds
Dermal
Edema
Fibrosis
Adnexal
Ceruminal gland-hypertrophy or hyperplasia
Hidradenitis
Lumen
Stenosis
Cartilage
Mineralization
Opacity
Dilation
Diverticulum
Epithelial changes
Simple purulent
Caseated or keratinous
Cholesteatoma
Proliferative
Destructive osteomyelitis

Modified from Griffin CE et aI: Otitis extema and media. Current Veterinary Dermatology: The Art and Science of Therapy.
Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993, P 245.

extema is greater in the months with greater relative humidity and temperature.P' Although increased temperature and relative humidity have been suggested, only one of
these explanations still seems plausible. The temperature of the external ear canal is not
different in erect versus pendulous eared dogs. 88 However, the pinnae have higher relative
humidity at the skin surface than other body regions. 63 Therefore, increased relative
humidity may be an important factor. Occasionally, dogs and cats present for chronic
recurrent otitis that appears to have only excessive cerumen production as the underlying
cause (see Fig. 19-4F). A variety of secondary bacterial or yeast infections occur. Workups reveal no underlying cause of these cases of idiopathic excessive cerumen production.
In dogs with hairy ear canals prone to otitis extema, hair removal should be part of the
management. However, in dogs without any ear disease or history of it, hair removal is
not recommended by the authors. In fact, hair removal can precipitate or exacerbate otitis
extema. Obstructive ear diseases often lead to otitis extema. Feline nasopharyngeal polyps
and neoplasia in dogs are most often likely to cause this problem. Shar peis have ear
canals of smaller diameter than those of other dog breeds and some individuals, especially
those with mucinosis, have stenotic vertical ear canals and external orifices.
Feline Nasopharyngeal Polyps

Feline nasopharyngeal polyps is a relatively uncommon inflammatory disease in cats. 93, 126
They may originate from the pharyngeal mucosa, the auditory (eustachian) tube, or the
middle ear (see Fig. 19-4G). Although their etiology is unknown, inflammatory polyps
may be congenital or secondary to viral or bacterial infections. A congenital cause has
been proposed because polyps occur primarily in young cats and because they have been

1208 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

seen in sibling kittens. Feline calicivirus has been recovered from the tissues of several
cats.
Nasopharyngeal polyps should be considered in the differential diagnosis of unilateral,
medically resistant otitis extema or otitis media with or without respiratory signs. Otorrhea
(dark brown ceruminous or purulent exudate) without signs of inflammation of the ear
canal lining, head-shaking behavior, and a mass in the horizontal ear canal are the most
common signs of external ear involvement. Middle ear involvement may cause head tilt,
nystagmus, and disequilibrium.
Diagnosis is confirmed by examination of the ear and upper airway under anesthesia.
Histopathologically, the lesion is a loose mass of connective tissue containing numerous
blood vessels and mononuclear leukocytes, covered by an epithelium that may be stratified, nonkeratinized squamous, or simple to bilayered ciliated columnar. Treatment includes surgical removal of the polyp and, often, bulla osteotomy. Postsurgical complications include regrowth, persistent discharge, and transient Homer's syndrome.
Ceruminal Gland Neoplasms

Neoplasms of the ear include those capable of affecting the skin elsewhere, as well as
primary neoplasms of ceruminal glands (see Chap. 20).21. 72. 135, 149 In the dog, the most
common pinnal neoplasms are sebaceous gland tumors, histiocytomas, and mast cell
tumors. In the cat, the most common pinnal neoplasms are squamous cell carcinoma,
basal cell tumor, hemangiosarcoma, and melanocytic neoplasms.
The most common neoplasm of the ear canal is ceruminal gland in origin (see Fig.
19-4H).100, 107, 108, 120 These neoplasms are more common in cats than in dogs. In the dog,
the neoplasms are typically benign, whereas in the cat, they are malignant in about 50%
of cases. Ceruminal gland neoplasms typically occur in older animals and in one ear.
Clinical signs include variable degrees of head-shaking and ear-scratching behavior, otorrhea, an offensive necrotic odor, frequent secondary bacterial otitis extema, and even
intermittent hemorrhage from the affected ear. Occasionally, ceruminal gland neoplasms
present as bulging, ulcerative, draining masses below the ear in the parotid region (Fig.
19-7). Otoscopic examination usually reveals a small (less than 1 em in diameter), wellcircumscribed, pinkish white, dome-shaped mass, with frequent ulceration, hemorrhage,
and secondary infection (Fig. 19-8). Ceruminal gland tumors are positive for cytokeratin. 1OO The only effective therapy is surgical excision, usually by lateral ear resection or
total ablation of the ear canal. The best results are achieved with ear canal ablation and

FIGURE 19-7. Ceruminal gland
carcinoma in a cat presenting as a
mass in the parotid area,

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1209

FIGURE 19-8. Nodular ceruminal gland carcinoma.

lateral bulla osteotomy. 107. 108 The recurrence rate is around 70% with lateral ear resection.107. 108

PRIMARY CAUSES
Primary causes directly induce otitis extema. The most common causes seen by the
authors are atopy, food hypersensitivity, keratinization disorders, and ear mites. It is
critical to successful long-term management that a primary cause be found and controlled.
Parasites

A number of parasites have been associated with otitis extema (see Table 19-8).21
However, the ear mite Otodectes cynotis is most common (see Chap. 6), being responsible
for up to 50% of the otitis extema cases diagnosed in cats and 5% to 10% of the cases in
dogs (see Fig. 19-6B). Ear mites may initiate otitis externa but remain undetected. One
reason is the difficulty that may occur in demonstrating the mites. As few as two or three
mites can cause clinical otitis extema.?' This may be explained by studies showing that ear
mites can induce Arthus-type and immediate-type hypersensitivity reactions.Pv 151 Another
explanation is that the mites initiate the otitis extema and then leave the canal or are
destroyed by the inflammation or the secondary infection. In recurrent cases of parasitic
otitis extema, the possibility of other in-contact animals being asymptomatic carriers
should be considered. Owing to variations in the time necessary for transmission from
carrier to affected patient, the time of onset of hypersensitivity reactions, and the develop-

1210 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

FIGURE 19-9. Legend on opposit.. page

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 121 1

FIGURE 19-9 Continued. I, Idiopathic inflammatory and hyperplastic otitis extema in a Cocker
spaniel. Both ear canals are mineralized, causing the pinna to extend out
laterally.

ment of clinieal signs noticeable by the owner, these diseases may present as rapidly or
intermittently recurrent cases."?
Fly bites are a common cause of pinnal dermatitis during fly season (see Chap. 6).
Pinpoint ulcers that are rapidly covered by a black-red crust are typical (see Fig. 19-6H).
Hypersensitivities

Atopy, food hypersensitivity, and contact hypersensitivity can cause otitis extema (see
Chap. 8).21,61 The otitis extema may be secondary to self-trauma, or the hypersensitivity
reaction may involve the external ear canal. Atopic dogs have otitis signs in 83% of the
cases, with 24% having otic symptoms at the onset of their allergic disease.F' Otitis may
be the only symptom in some cases,77, 78, 139 Atopy, as a result of its high incidence and
the incidence of otitis in atopies, is more frequently associated with otitis extema than is
food hypersensitivity. Erythema of the pinna and vertical canal is a common feature of
allergic otitis extema (see Fig. 19-9A and B).77 Chronic inflammation may eventually lead
to secondary bacterial or yeast infections.
Ear disease is present in up to 80% of dogs and cats with food hypersensitivity, and
food hypersensitivity is the second most common hypersensitivity reaction to affect the
ear. Cocker spaniels and Labrador retrievers have been suggested as breeds more likely to
present with otitis extema as the only symptom of food hypersensitivity." Dogs younger
than 6 months of age with acute bilateral otitis and no evidence of ear mites or foreign
bodies should also be considered as more likely to have food hypersensitivity.
Contact hypersensitivity may result from medications (e.g., neomycin) used to treat
otitis extema. In addition, vehicles such as propylene glycol can also be responsible for
hypersensitive or irritant reactions in the ear."? Therefore, changing medications on the
basis of major active ingredients may not alleviate a treatment reaction. Typically, these

FIGURE 19-9. A, Allergic otitis extema in a dog with atopy. B, Contact hypersensitivity in a cat due to a topical product
that contained neomycin. C, Erythema multiforme in a dog with severe ulceration of the ear canal. Candida albicans was
found in cytologic studies and in otic cultures. D, Seborrheic otitis extema in a hypothyroid dog. E, Sterile eosinophilic
pinnal folliculitis in a dog. F, Pseudomonas otitis extema in a Cocker spaniel with atopy and primary seborrhea. G,
Proliferative otitis extema with numerous folds resulting. Similar changes are present in the vertical and horizontal canal. H,
Classic fly bites (Sto1lWXYs calcitrans) on the pinna of a dog.

1212 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

cases have a history of either (1) short-term response to therapy, and then as medication
administration is continued, symptoms worsen; or (2) previous good responses to a product, but a worsening with the most recent course of treatment.P" 141 Another clinical clue
is the development of erythema dorsally and ventrally to the external orifice, because the
medications usually contact these areas as well. Drug reactions may also involve the ear
canal and the pinnae. This may be due to contact allergic or irritant effects. In other
cases, systemic drug reactions, such as erythema multiforme, may affect the ear canal (see
Fig. 19-9C).
Keratinization Disorders

The keratinization disorders generally present as chronic ceruminous otitis externa.s!
Breeds prone to primary idiopathic seborrhea tend to have ceruminous otitis extema (see
Chap. 14). Endocrinopathies, such as hypothyroidism and sex hormone imbalances (see
Chap. 10) may result in chronic ceruminous otitis extema, most likely by altering keratinization and, possibly, glandular function (see Fig. 19-6D). Hypothyroidism is the most
commonly encountered endocrinopathy involving the ear. Many times, the primary cause
of the otitis extema is a disease that has some other historical or physical examination
findings as a clue.
Foreign Bodies

Foreign bodies that enter the ear canal and become lodged usually result in otitis
externa." Typically, it occurs unilaterally, although bilateral disease may occur. Most
commonly, the dogs and cats have acute onset of head shaking and scratching at the ear
or ears. There is no initial discharge; however, if immediate veterinary care is not sought,
these cases may rapidly become secondarily infected and present with a purulent exudate.
Examples of otic foreign bodies include plant awns, sand, and dried out medicaments.
Glandular Disorders

Glandular disorders are not well documented in the dog and cat. One study did show that
Cocker spaniels with otitis had a greater surface area of glands in their ears than did
Cocker spaniels without ear disease.r" Cocker spaniels, English Springer spaniels, and
Labrador retrievers have more ceruminal glands and hair follicles in their ear canals than
do Greyhounds and mongrels.w In addition, one of the authors (CEG) has seen cases in
dogs and cats that had chronic ceruminous otitis and also demonstrated histologic sebaceous gland hyperplasia. They had no other evidence of keratinization disorder or skin
disease. Management necessitated that clients learn how to clean the ears on a routine
basis.
Autoimmune Diseases

Autoimmune diseases may affect the ear canal, but most commonly cause pinnal disease."
Of the diseases listed in Table 19-8, the one most commonly seen is pemphigus foliaceus.
Viral Diseases

Viral diseases are known to cause otitis extema in humans but have rarely been incriminated in the dog. Canine distemper virus has been associated with otitis extema, but
whether this is actually directly due to viral invasion of the ear or is secondary to
debilitation, spread of respiratory infection, or immune suppression is unknown.
Miscellaneous Conditions

Idiopathic inflammatory or hyperplastic otitis externa is seen primarily in Cocker spaniels,
initially at a relatively young age. 133 Over one to several years, these dogs develop marked
proliferative otitis extema if they are not aggreSSively managed. Without treatment, they
often progress to calcified ear canals. These cases usually do not have other skin disease,

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1213
although it is imperative to rule out atopy, primary idiopathic seborrhea of Cocker
spaniels, and food hypersensitivity. In the authors' experience, food hypersensitivity is the
disease most often overlooked, because a diet trial alone will not reverse the perpetuating
factors. Food hypersensitivity can only be ruled out with a diet trial and provocative
exposure testing once the ears have been improved with therapy. The etiology of this
disease is unknown but, considering the histopathologic glandular changes, it is attractive
to consider that this may represent a primary glandular disorder.lv'
Juvenile cellulitis often involves the ear canal and occasionally initially starts with otitis
extema and pinnal disease (see Chap. 18). These puppies have marked lymphadenopathy
at presentation. This has also been described in a 2-year-old Lhasa apso.P?
Canine sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis is an uncommon idiopathic, nonseasonal,
bilaterally symmetric pinnal dermatosis of dogs (see Fig. 19-9E).136 Erythematous papules
and crusts are present on the concave surface of the pinnae. Pruritus is variable. The ear
canal is not involved. Cytologic examination of papules reveals numerous eosinophils and
no microorganisms. Biopsy reveals eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis. Cultures are
negative. The condition is responsive to topical or oral glucocorticoids but usually recurs.
Canine proliferative eosinophilic otitis externa is an uncommon idiopathic inflammatory disorder of the ear canal of dogs. 127 Affected dogs have a history of chronic unilateral
otitis extema. Otoscopic examination reveals solitary or multiple polypoid masses attached
to the ear canal lining by a slender stalk. The masses obstruct the canal. Biopsy reveals a
papillomatous, proliferative eosinophilic dermatitis or eosinophilic granuloma. Intraepidermal eosinophilic microabscesses are found. Some lesions contain multifocal areas of degenerate collagen and flame figures, with or without an accompanying palisading granuloma. Surgical excision may be curative or be followed by recurrence.

SECONDARY CAUSES
Secondary causes contribute to or cause pathology only in the abnormal ear or in combination with predisposing factors. These same organisms or agents may be found in normal
ears without disease. They are generally easy to manage with a specific drug once the
diagnosis is made. In some cases, eliminating the concurrent predisposing factor or
primary disease may result in the resolution of the secondary cause.
Bacteria

Bacteria are rarely primary causes; therefore, a diagnosis of bacterial otitis extema is
usually not a complete diagnosis. S. intermedius and the gram-negative organisms Pseudomonas spp. (see Fig. 19-9F), Proteus spp., E. coli, and Klebsiella spp. are most commonly
isolated as secondary pathogens (Table 19_9).54.59.61.64, 118 The four gram-negative organisms are not routinely cultured from normal ears. Pseudomonas spp. are more prevalent
in chronic otitis. This may reflect that this organism is well adapted for the warm moist
environment of ears occluded by hyperplasia of skin and ceruminal glands. 71 Scarification,
moisture, and alkalinization were used to create Pseudomonas aeruginosa ear infections in
normal dogs. 109 After these organisms establish infection, they Significantly contribute to
the inflammation, damage, and clinical signs.
Yeast

M. pachydermatis is the most common yeast that contributes to otitis extema as a
perpetuating factor. 59 . 61. 118 It is a budding yeast that has a peanut or bottle shape and
may be found in as many as 36% of normal canine ears." In otitis, it is found in up to
76% of the ears and frequently in combination with Staphylococcus Sp.56. 95 It has been
proposed that S. intermedius produces a factor that stimulates the growth of M. pachydermatis. 56 It has also been shown that M. pachydermatis is a heterogeneous species, with at
least two groups identified by a variety of biochemical characteristics.P' Two strains were
different in that one could not grow in the absence of nicotinic acid but grew well in the
presence of staphylococci. Possibly, this is the factor that staphylococci supply. M. pachydermatis is a common complication with hypersensitivity disorders and may result in a

..

-....,

37.9
2.4
1.6
0

-

-

-

-

0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

6
4
0

28.3
0
0
-

-

-

-

-

-

1.7

0

53

-

-

-

-

0
2
0
2

0
0

35.9
34.6
20.8
0.8

-

-

-

0.8

30.9

-

Grono (Data to
be Published)
%

44.3
16.5
9.9
1.1

-

-

-

1.1

30.4

-

Boyle, Grono
(Data to be
Published)
%

23.0
5.0
5.0

-

-

-

35.0

-

Sampson et al.
(1973)
%

Ear Canals

OTITIS EXTERNA

86.2
16.4
8.6

-

-

-

38.0

Marshall et al.
(1974)
%

65.8
26.3
10.5

NI
NI
NI

15.8
2.6

NI

15.8
7.9
5.3

60.5

Cole et al.
(1998)
HEC %

34.2
36.8
13.2

5.3
2.6
2.6

13.2
2.6

5.3

13.2
18.4
NI

36.8

ME %

OTITIS MEDIA

Data from Crono LR: Otitis extema. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VI. W. B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1980; Cole LK, et aI: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolated
pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis media. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:534, 1998; Matsuda H, et aI: The aerobic bacterial flora of the middle and external ears in normal dogs. J
Smal Anim Pract 25:269, 1984.
'Examination for MycoplasTTIiL was carried out in 20 ears.
ME = Middle ear. HEC = Horizontal ear canal. NI = Not isolated.

Gram-Negative
Aspergillus
Branhamella spp.
Escherichia coli
Enterobacter aerogenes
Mycoplasma sp."
Enterococcus spp.
Citrobacter spp.
Unidentified rod
Nongroup-D Streptococcus
Anaerobes
Lactobacillus spp.
Yeasts and Fungi
Malassezia spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
Proteus spp.
Streptococcus spp.
Culture negative ears

Pediococcus
Unidentified cocci
Corynebacterium spp.
,B-hemolytic Streptococcus
a-hemolytic Streptococcus
Bacillus spp.
Unidentified rod

15

2
7
10
2
5
0

-

-

Matsuda et al.
(1984) %

-

Marshall et al.
(1974) %

Middle Ear

-

Sampson et al,
(1973)
%

47.6

Grono,
Frost
(1969)
%

Ear Canals

CLINICALLY NORMAL

ORGANISMS ISOLATED FROM NORMAL EAR CANALS AND FROM EARS AFFECTED WITH OTITIS EXTERNA
AND OTITIS MEDIA
. .........................................................
...............

Gram-Positive
Staphylococcus intermedius
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus xylosus
Staphylococcus

ORGANISMS

• Table 19-9

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1215

superinfection after antibiotic therapy. M. pachydennatis has been shown to be pathogenic when it or fluid is put in the ear canal. 105 Two major phenotypes (large and small
colony types) of M. pachydennatis have been described, but the significance of these is
unknown.wP' Oleic and linoleic acids were shown to be mycostatic, and the common fatty
acids found in canine cerumen are margaric, stearic, oleic, and linoleic." The possibility of
a public health significance for M. pachydennatis has been raised. It was reported in an
intensive care nursery where 15 infants were culture positive over a period of approximately 15 months.F The culture-positive babies were at greater risk for lower weight and
had greater severity of concomitant illness. It was speculated that the M. pachydennatis
was introduced into the intensive care nursery from a health-care worker's hands after
being colonized from pet dogs at home. Further studies to support or explain this
association are anxiously awaited.
Topical Acquired Irritant Reactions

Various therapeutic ingredients may induce inflammation in the already damaged aural
epidermis and dermis but have no effect on normal skin.81 As a result, they are not typical
topical allergic or irritant reactions. They may have a similar history as other topical
irritant or allergic reactions, but often they will cause the ear canal to become ulcerated.
Some of these ingredients, such as propylene glycol, are present in numerous topical
products, even though active ingredients may be totally different. The continued use of
those ingredients hinders the healing and beneficial effects that are expected.

PERPETUATING FACTORS
Perpetuating factors prevent the resolution of otitis externa or otitis media. They result
from inflammation and the pathologic responses of the skin and otic structures. These
changes occur from the effect of the predisposing factors, and primary and secondary
causes. In chronic cases, one or more of these factors are present. In acute cases of otitis
externa, treating the primary cause may be sufficient in controlling a case, but after the
establishment of some perpetuating factors, treatment must be directed at them. Perpetuating factors may be the major reason for poor response to therapy, regardless of the
predisposing factors and primary causes present.
Progressive Pathologic Changes

The microanatomy of the canine and feline ear canal have been studied. 58, 70, 144, 145
Chronic inflammation stimulates the skin lining the ear canal to undergo numerous
changes, including epidermal hyperkeratosis and hyperplasia, dermal edema and fibrosis,
ceruminal gland hyperplasia, and dilatation. Hidradenitis or inflammation of the ceruminal
glands may also occur. A study found that sebaceous glands do not atrophy, as had been
previously reported.v'" Morphometric analysis showed that breeds predisposed to otitis
externa had an increased quantity of ceruminal glands compared with the number of
sebaceous glands, and that dogs with otitis externa had an even greater area of ceruminal
glands. An occasional animal may have sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Chronic inflammation
can lead to permanent changes in the microanatomy and physiology of the ear canal.P"
Abnormal epithelial cell migration may occur in response to inflammation. ISla This
mechanism, which is normally responsible for the removal of the waxes, lipids, exfoliating
corneocytes, and associated commensal bacteria, is affected. Inflammation and stenosis
may be responsible for slowing, stopping, and even reversing this migration pattern. Some
evidence to support this in the dog is the finding that dogs with otitis media may have
adnexa and stratified epidermis growing in the middle ear that is believed to have
migrated in from the external ear canal. 102
These progressive changes cause a thickening of the skin, which eventually extends to
both sides of the auricular cartilage. The swelling leads to stenosis of the canal lumen.
More important, the skin is thrown into numerous folds, which inhibit effective cleaning
and application of topical medications (see Fig. 19-9G). These folds act as sites for the
accumulation of secretions and exudates, and the perpetuation and protection of second-

1216 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
ary microorganisms (see Fig. 19-6C). The epidermis becomes thickened, and the hyperkeratotic stratum corneum increases the keratin debris that is exfoliated into the canal
lumen. The increased secretions and epithelial debris favor the proliferation of bacteria
and yeast.
The combination of microbial metabolic byproducts, secretions, and debris trapped
within the folds and ear canal from the stenosis further contribute to the pathologic
changes. In a sense, regardless of the initial disease process, the clinician is now faced
with numerous areas of fold dermatitis. Fibrosis and calcification complicate management
by contributing to stenosis of the ear canal and by inhibiting the effective treatment of
deep infections. It is interesting to note that the calcification occurs in the connective
tissue outside of the auricular or annular cartilage. These changes have a major impact on
therapeutic regimens and must be considered in the management of chronic cases.
Tympanic Membrane Alterations

The abnormal tympanic membrane thickens, becomes opaque or slightly colored, and
loses its transparency. Additionally, the attachment to the manubrium cannot be seen. It
may appear white, off-white, yellow, brown, or gray. Therefore, it can appear the same as
impacted exudates or keratin plugs.77. 81 This is a common problem when cases are
referred to specialists and the referring veterinarian believes the tympanic membrane is
intact, but it is not.
It has been theorized that the tympanic membrane may dilate and extend into the
tympanic cavity. Because the tympanic membrane is capable of reepithelializing after
rupture, it is common to have otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane.P's In one
study in which 8 dogs were necropsied, ruptured tympanic membranes were identified in
only 2 of 14 ears with otitis externa and media.l'" However, out of the 62 middle ear
specimens examined, histologically definitive tympanic membrane could only be recognized in 26%. Tissue, including adnexal structures that originate from the external ear
canal, may be found in the middle ear cavity, even when the tympanic membrane appears
intact. The auditory tube was patent in all cases in which it was examined at necropsy.
Commonly, the tympanic membrane thickens in response to inflammation and may develop polyploid extensions of granulation tissue into the middle ear cavity, which, in some
cases, form adhesions with middle ear mucosa.
Aural cholesteatoma is a keratin-filled epidermoid cyst, located within the middle ear
cavity. Aural cholesteatoma may occur in 11 % of the animals with chronic otitis media.l'"
It has been postulated that cholesteatomas result when a pocket of tympanic membrane
forms within the middle ear cavity. One predisposing factor may be spontaneous occlusion
of the external ear canal from chronic proliferative changes, leading to external ear canal
stenosis.
Another response of the tympanic membrane is the development of a pocket (false
middle ear) that allows the impaction and sequestration of material from topical therapy.
This may explain why some dogs appear to regrow their tympanic membrane rapidly after
flushing of the false middle ear.?" In contrast to dogs with ruptured tympanic membranes,
these animals cannot have their middle ear flushed through the eustachian tube and are
less susceptible to ototoxicity.
Otitis Media

Otitis media is inflammation of the middle ear.!" The normal middle ear cavity may
contain some bacteria (staphylococci, streptococci) and occasional yeast.!'? but there is no
exudate or inflammatory cells. The presence of exudate within the tympanic cavity is
difficult to treat with topical therapy and often remains as a source for infections and
proinflammatory toxins and debris to reach the external ear canal. In more advanced
cases, the authors have found keratin plugs developing within the tympanic cavity (Fig.
19-10). The keratin may serve as a reservoir for bacteria and a source for inflammation.
Eventually, calcification may occur, which may be observed radiographically. In some
cases, osteomyelitis of the bony wall or within the newly proliferated bone occurs. Osteomyelitis is difficult to treat medically and often requires surgery to alleviate. Otitis media

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1217

FIGURE 19-10. Keratinous
plugs removed by flushing from a
middle ear cavity (a dime is in the
upper right comer).

occurs commonly with chronic otitis extema. Histologic changes in the middle ear may be
present, even with an intact tympanic membrane.V" The presence of adnexa in some of
these cases also supports the idea that previous tympanic membrane rupture was present,
but the tympanic membranes have since healed-possibly even while otitis extema or
media is present. In one study, otitis media was diagnosed in 38 dog ears, and an intact
tympanic membrane was present in 71% of the ears."
Otitis media may occur from extension of otitis extema through the tympanic membrane, from ascending nasal or respiratory infections through the auditory tube, and from
hematogenous spread. In dogs, only extension from otitis extema is considered a common
cause of otitis media, but in cats, upper respiratory infections are mown causes of otitis
media. Otitis media has been reported to be present in 16% of dogs with acute otitis
extema and 52% of dogs with chronic otitis externa.r'" Another study reported otitis
media in 82.6% of chronic otitis extema ears and that the tympanic membranes were
intact in 71% of the dogs with otitis media. 54 A difference in total microbial isolates or
their susceptibility patterns between horizontal canal and middle ear samples were found
in 89.5% of the ears.v' Bilateral otitis media was present in 72.7% of the dogs.
An extremely rare complication of bacterial otitis media is meningoencephalitis.wOne author (WHM) has examined two allergic dogs who presented for head shaking,
head tilt, and Homer's syndrome. Both dogs had externally bulging, normal-appearing
tympanic membranes, as is seen in serous otitis media in children, and both dogs responded completely to treatment with amitriptyline.

CLINICAL FEATURES
Otitis extema is a common condition in dogs, perhaps accounting for 15% of all the dogs
presented for veterinary care.v- 61,115.117 The true incidence of otitis extema is not mown,
and one study noted that 5.8% of supposedly normal dogs had a history of otic symptoms. 122 In cats, the incidence is much lower, perhaps 4%.51. 115-117, 137 The lower inci-

1218 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

dence in cats may be partially attributable to the upright position of the pinna and the
relatively hairless ear canal.
The most common indication of otitis extema is aural pruritus or head shaking. As
otitis extema progresses, a mild to marked exudate or malodor may develop. This is
usually when the client presents the pet to the veterinarian. It is imperative that a
thorough history, both general and dermatologic, be taken. If that is not done, many
patients are unnecessarily misdiagnosed. History taking should include questions regarding
predisposing factors. Additionally, the majority of cases of chronic ear disease have historical or physical evidence of the primary disease. The common indications that the underlying problem is a hypersensitivity disorder are seasonality and pruritus in other body
locations. Keratinization disorders may have changes in coat quality, color, and density or
scale formation. Hearing loss may also occur and should always be assessed by asking
questions about the dogs hearing as well as observing responses to sounds made during
the examination. One study using brainstem auditory evoked response showed that hearing loss in otitis cases most commonly was a result of conductive hearing loss due to
pathology in the external or middle ear and that only 2% were deaf. 66
Clinical signs of otitis media are quite variable and not specific, Most commonly the
symptoms mimic or occur because of concurrent otitis extema and include head shaking,
aural discharge, or odor. Deafness with extension to inner ear disease may also occur.
Pain when eating may be noticed in dogs with severe disease or in animals with otitis
media that has progressed to involve the temporomandibular joint. 102

PHYSICAL FINDINGS
Physical findings indicative of otitis extema include erythema, swelling, scaling, crusting,
alopecia, broken hairs, head shyness, otic discharge (otorrhea), malodor, and pain on
palpation of the auricular cartilage. Some animals attempt to scratch the ear with the
Ipsilateral hind paw or shake the head during or after palpation of the ear canal. Lesions
may involve the pinna and the skin caudal to the pinna on the head, on the lateral face,
and around the vertical canal. Pyotraumatic dermatitis of the lateral face and aural
hematomas are the lesions most commonly associated with aural pruritus, although clinical
otitis extema may not be noticeable. Head tilt may be seen with either otitis extema or
otitis media. However, concurrent facial nerve abnormalities (e.g., facial palsy and hemifacial spasm) or Homer's syndrome indicates otitis media, although facial palsy may also be
seen with hypothyroidism and concurrent ceruminous otitis.
Palpation of the external ear canal and tympanic bulla may provide additional information. The thickness, firmness, and pliability of the vertical and horizontal canal should
be determined. Thicker, firmer, and less pliable canals are associated with proliferative
changes and support a more guarded prognosis. Mineralized canals are rock hard and can
rarely be returned to normal or successfully managed with medical therapy (see Fig. 1991).77 Pain and palpable abnormalities of the tympanic bulla imply the presence of otitis
media.
Erythema of the concave surface of the pinna with a normal convex surface is strongly
suggestive of atopy or, less likely, food hypersensitivity. Early cases may have minimal
erythema of the vertical canal with a normal horizontal canal. Cases that started with only
ear canal disease and, after treatment, spread peripherally in rostral and ventral directions
should make one suspect topical therapy reactions. Ulcerations of the external orifice and!
or ear canal should make one consider the secondary causes Pseudomonas infection,
Candida infection, and topical reactions.
Otoscopic Examination

The otoscopic examination is used to detect foreign bodies, to determine whether otitis
media is present, and to assess what type of lesions, exudate, and progressive pathologic
changes have occurred. If unilateral disease is present, the unaffected ear should be
examined first, This decreases the possibility of the dog's experiencing pain and resisting
examination of the second ear. Examining the unaffected ear first decreases the risk of

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • I 2 I 9

spreading an infectious agent from the diseased ear to the unaffected ear. Having multiple
otoscopic cones of varying sizes placed in cold sterilization containers allows one to use
aseptic cones. One problem often encountered in practice is the extremely painful, ulcerated, swollen ear that one cannot adequately examine. Even with anesthesia, these cases
may not be adequately examined, and it may be necessary to treat the animal and to
reduce the swelling and inflammation, then have the patient return in 4 to 7 days so that
an otoscopic examination can be properly performed."
A record of lesions should be kept. Proliferative changes, the amount and type of
discharge, and the presence of erythema or ulcers should be noted (see Fig. 19-6D).
Assessment of the tympanic membrane should be made and recorded.
The degree of canal stenosis should be determined, because changes in lumen size
can be used to help monitor treatment. Is proliferation the result of diffuse thickening, or
does the canal epithelium have a cobblestone appearance? The location of the stenosis
should also be noted. Does it involve the horizontal canal, the vertical canal, or both?
The type of discharge can be used to help determine what primary or perpetuating
factors may be involved. Dry coffee ground-like debris is typical of ear mites. Moist
brown discharge tends to be associated with staphylococcal and yeast infections. Purulent
creamy to yellow exudates are often seen with gram-negative infections. Waxy, greasy,
yellow to tan debris is typical of ceruminous otitis, sometimes with concurrent Malassezia
infection. Ceruminous discharge is most often seen with keratinization, glandular conditions, and chronic hypersensitivity disorders.
Fiberoptic video-enhanced otoscopes are now available. These machines improve the
visualization of the ear canal and tympanic membrane (see Figs. 19-6A to F). They allow
photographic records to be taken, which are valuable for patient records as well as to
show clients what is occurring in their pets' ear canals.
DIAGNOSIS
A diagnosis of otitis extema is easily made from the history and the physical examination.
Otitis media is much more difficult to diagnose, because many patients present with
symptoms of only otitis extema. Evidence of inflammation of the tissue surrounding the
middle ear or the inner ear usually indicates that otitis media has occurred. Even with
otoscopic examination, many cases of otitis media may not be detected, and in cases with
apparently intact diseased tympanic membranes, otitis media may be present. The tympanic membrane becomes opaque and white, gray, pinkish, or brown owing to disease and
thickening. When this occurs and it loses its characteristic opalescent, fish scale appearance, it may resemble a keratinous plug."? In addition, middle ear changes or the medial
wall of the tympanic bulla may be interpreted as a diseased but intact tympanic membrane. The tympanum is rarely seen to bulge in canine otitis media, and when it does, it
is usually associated with inspissated middle ear debris rather than fluid. 80 An evaluation of
tympanometry, otoscopy, and palpation findings revealed that in inflamed ears, only tympanometry was accurate in determining the integrity of the tympanic membrane. WI This
study revealed that even after lavage of the ear canal, a satisfactory view of the tympanic
membrane could be obtained in only 28% of cases otoscopically examined while under
anesthesia.
Radiography is indicated in suspected cases of otitis media and especially before
surgical procedures involving the middle ear. However, radiography is helpful only when it
demonstrates middle ear pathologic changes (e.g., fluid lines or changes in the osseous
bulla); normal radiographs do not rule out the presence of otitis media. 118, 131, 151a Tympanometry appears valuable in the diagnosis of a ruptured tympanic membrane. Its value in
clinically inflamed ears and ears with otitis media needs to be determined, although it
appears preferable to previously described techniques. WI, 118
Palpation of the tympanic membrane with a blunt instrument has been shown to be
inaccurate and causes a statistically Significant incidence of damage to the tympanic
membrane. WI, 118 However, palpation and positioning of a soft feeding tube to help
determine the presence or the location of the tympanic membrane is a valuable technique

1220 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

that may reveal false middle ear cavities." The feeding tube is passed under visualization
through a surgical otoscope head within the ear canal to the level where the tympanic
membrane is expected to be located. In a normal ear, the tip of the tube remains
visualized. In ears with false middle ear or ruptured tympanic membranes, the tube is
passed beyond view and in a ventral direction below the normal plane of the horizontal
canal.
Myringotomy has been promoted in the past as a technique to gain access to the
middle ear for draining fluid, relieving pressure and instilling medication.P'' Though it is a
useful technique for those indications, it is also considered the best way to detect otitis
media when combined with cytology and culture.?' The important aspect is that the
tympanic membrane is incised or punctured in the ventral half, preferably the posterioventral quadrant, which is below the attachment to the manubrium.
Cytologic examination of discharge usually does not establish a definitive diagnosis,
but it is valuable in determining what infectious agents, if any, are present. Cytologic
study reveals any cocci (especially Staphylococcus and Streptococcus), rods (especially
Pseudomonas and Proteus), other gram-positive or gram-negative organisms, budding
yeasts (Malassezia and Candida), and mixed infections. The presence of white blood cells,
as well as phagocytosis of bacteria, indicates that the body is responding to the infection
and that treatment of the infection is warranted. The mere visualization of numerous
bacteria in the absence of an inflammatory response and phagocytosis usually indicates
only multiplication and colonization by the microorganism, not clinical infection. If there
are toxic neutrophils, the ear canal must be flushed to remove the toxins.
Cytology is the most appropriate method to determine the importance of bacteria. In
one study, 31.6% of ears were culture positive for Staphylococcus or Streptococcus but
were cytologically negative for cocci." When gram-negative organisms were cultured, only
20% were cytologically negative." The criteria used for bacterial significance on cytology
was four or more organisms per oil immersion field (OIF). Unfortunately, the significance
of these findings is unclear, because the presence of inflammatory cells, phagocytosis, and
response to antibiotic therapy directed against the cultured organisms were not recorded.
One of the authors (C.E.G.) uses one bacteriurnlOIF as significant, especially if inflammatory cells are present.
Cytologic evaluation is the preferred method to ascertain the role of Malassezia in a
particular case for two reasons. In one study, 18% of the cases that had Malassezia
detected by cytologic examination were sterile on culture by a commercial laboratory
culturing specifically for Malassezia at 37°C (98.6°F).77 Another blinded study compared
the sensitivity of cytologic study versus culture for detecting bacteria or yeast in normal
and otitic canine ears."? The sensitivity of cytologic examination of cerumen for detection
of gram-positive cocci, gram-negative rods, and yeasts was 84%, 100%, and 100%, respectively. However, the sensitivity of the culture for detection of these organisms was 59%,
69%, and 50%, respectively. It has been suggested that if Malassezia organisms are found
in ear swab cytologic examination in numbers averaging 10 or more per HPF or 4 or
more per OIF, the yeast should be considered to be an important pathogen.Pv 130
Cytology should be done from the deep ear canal and, when appropriate, the middle
ear cavity. The incidence of otitis media with an intact tympanic membrane is as high as
59% in dogs with chronic otitis. 64 Studies by Cole and colleagues have demonstrated that
the findings from the external ear canal cytology and middle ear cytology may also vary
greatly. Yeast were considered significant in 65.8% of ear canals and 34.2% of middle ears
in 38 ears with otitis media and extema/" When otitis extema and media are both
present, cytologic examination of both compartments reveals the same organisms in only
58.6% of the cases/" Any time a relatively normal tympanic membrane is not visualized in
a chronic recurrent case of otitis extema, the middle ear should be sampled.
Histopathologic studies have been conducted on many dogs and cats with otitis
externa.r" 73. 149 Unfortunately, these have usually been animals with chronic disease in
which the cause of the otitis extema was not specified. In general, there are variable
degrees of epidermal, sebaceous gland, and ceruminal gland hyperplasia. The inflammation is usually interstitial, diffuse, or nodular in pattern, with lymphocytes, plasma cells,

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1221
and mast cells usually predominating. Many cases show some degree of fibrosis and cystic
dilatation of ceruminal glands. Suppurative epidermitis and hidradenitis may be seen.
CULTURE AND SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTING

The primary indication for culture and susceptibility testing is the presence of otitis media
or severe otitis extema associated with rodlike bacteria when systemic therapy is going to
be prescribed. Culture and susceptibility testing should not be done without cytologic
evaluation, which demonstrates that bacteria and white blood cells (that are exhibiting
degenerative changes and are phagocytosing the bacteria) are present in the discharge.
However, the conclusion of one study, demonstrating the relatively inaccurate results for
detecting bacteria with cytology versus culture of the middle ear, is that otitis media
should be cultured/" They also found that bacteria isolated by culture from the external
and middle ear of the same ear were usually not identical either in type or antibiotic
susceptibility. Therefore, all cases of otitis media to be cultured should have both the ear
horizontal canal and middle ear sampled.s" It is common for otitis patients to have
multiple types of bacteria isolated from an inflamed ear canal. In one study of 176 otitis
cultures, 49.4% had two or more types of bacteria and 27.3% had three or greater
different isolates per specimen.v" Because numerous bacterial species may be cultured
from tissues of the osseous bulla, a single antimicrobial agent to which all bacterial isolates
are susceptible may not be identified. 149a Individual specimens for culture should be
obtained from both osseous bullae during bilateral total ear canal ablations, because
different bacterial species may be isolated from each ear. 149a Bacteria and yeasts usually
multiply to large numbers in abnormal ear canals, and the mere ability to culture large
numbers of one or more microorganisms does not demonstrate that these organisms are
involved in the disease process. It is important to remember that resistance to a particular
antibiotic in vitro may not correlate with clinical response, because direct application of
medication to the ear canal results in a higher antibiotic concentration than with systemic
medication. For some canine otic isolates-such as P. aeruginosa, ,a-hemolytic streptococci, and enterococci-disk diffusion techniques (Kirby-Bauer) indicate in vitro susceptibility, whereas minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) testing indicates resistance."
When therapy will be limited to topical treatment, culture and susceptibility testing are
rarely cost effective.
Depending on the primary diagnosis, many other tests may be needed to make a
definitive diagnosis. Which tests are most cost effective and indicated depends on the
history and complete physical examination findings.
TREATMENT

Therapy of otitis extema depends on identifying and controlling the predisposing factors
and primary causes whenever possible. In addition, cleaning the ear canals and the middle
ear, applying topical therapies, and administering systemic medications may be necessary
for the effective elimination or control of primary and secondary causes as well as
perpetuating factors.v- 118, 151a
The administration of sedatives such as xylazine or ketamine and diazepam may be
needed to allow adequate examination or treatment in some cases. Other animals require
a general anesthetic. Many clients are reluctant to have their dogs anesthetized but are
often more understanding if the need for getting the ears cleaned and completely examined is explained in detail.
Cleaning

Thorough cleaning of the ear canals is extremely important for the effective management
of otitis extema. 21 , 77, 115, 118, 151a In chronic cases of otitis media, or in animals with a false
middle ear, management includes cleaning that area. Cleaning is valuable for several
reasons. Besides preventing effective therapy, the exudate may interfere with adequate
examination until it is cleaned out. Foreign bodies, especially small ones, are eliminated

1222 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
• Table 19-10

OTIC CLEANSERS, CERUMINOlYTICS, AND
DRYING AGENTS
CERUMINOLYTIC
CLEANSERS

Docusate Solution (Life Science)
Clear; Ear Cleansing Solution
(DVM)
Panotic (Pfizer)
Clear; Cleanser (DVM)
Cerumenex (Purdue-Fredericks)
Cerumene (EVSCO)
Oticalm (DVM)
Cerulytic (Virbac)
Corium-20 (VRx)
Nolva-Cleanse (Fort Dodge)
Oti-Clens (Pfizer)
Otipan (Hariman)
Clear; Drying Solution (DVM)
Bur-Otic Astringent Ear Drops
(Virbac)
Dermal Dry (Butler)
Domeboro Otic (Dome)
Otic-Care B Drying Cream
(ARC Labs)
Alocetic Ear Rinse (DVM)
Epi-Otic (Virbac)
Oticlean A Ear Cleansing Lotion
(ARC Labs)
Otic-Fresh (Pan American)
Nolvasan Otic (Fort Dodge)
Otocetic Solution (Vedco)
Chlorhexiderm Flush (DVM)

MILD
CLEANSERS

DRYING AGENTS

DRYING
CLEANSERS

x
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

when ears are adequately cleaned. Pus and inflammatory debris can inactivate some
medications (e.g., polymyxin). Thorough cleaning removes bacterial toxins, degenerating
cellular debris, and free fatty acids, thus decreasing the stimulation for further inflammation. In proliferative conditions of the ear canals, thorough cleaning is one of the most
valuable steps in management, just as it is in treating intertrigo (fold dermatitis}."?
Ceruminolytic agents greatly facilitate and expedite the cleaning procedure (Tables
19-10 and 19-11). They include various types of surfactants, such as dioctyl sodium

• Table 19-11

OTIC CLEANSING PREPARTIONS

PRODUCT (COMPANY)

INGREDIENTS

Adams Pan-Otic (Pfizer)

Isopropyl alcohol, aloe vera, urea, propylene glycol, dioctyl
sodium sulfosuccinate
Acetic acid, aloe vera
Acetic acid, Burow's solution, propylene glycol
Benzoyl alcohol, propylene glycol
Squalene
Chlorhexidine
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, urea peroxide
Acetic acid, boric acid
Lactic acid, salicylic acid, chitosanide, propylene glycol
Lactic acid, salicylic acid, propylene glycol
Propylene glycol, surfactants
Benzoic acid, malic acid, salicylic acid, eucalyptus
Malic acid, benzoic acid, salicylic acid, propylene glycol

Alocetic Ear Rinse (DVM)
Bur-Otic Astringent Ear Drops (Vlrbac)
Cerulytic Ear Ceruminolytic (Virbac)
Cerumene (EVSCO)
Chlorhexiderm Flush (DVM)
Clear; Ear Cleansing Solution (DVM)
DermaPet Ear/Skin Cleanser (DermaPet)
Epi-Otic Ear Cleanser (Virbac)
Gent-L-Clens (Schering-Plough)
Nolva-Cleanse (Fort Dodge)
OtiCaim Cleansing Solution (DVM)
Oti-Clens (Pfizer)

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1223
sulfosuccinate (docusate, DSS) (Docusate solution, Life Science) or calcium sulfosuccinate,
and detergents that act by emulsifYing the waxes and lipids. Carbamide peroxide (Earoxide
ear cleanser, Tornlyn) is a slightly less potent ceruminolytic agent that acts as a humectant
by releasing urea when activated. It releases oxygen, creating a foaming action that helps
to break down or dislodge large clumps of debris. Carbamide peroxide is particularly
helpful with more purulent exudates. The ceruminolytic Cleary ear cleansing solution
(DVM Pharmaceuticals) combines DSS and carbamide peroxide, thus possessing the surfactant, humectant, and oxygen-producing effects of both ingredients.
Some ear cleansers also have antimicrobial properties.w-- 102b Epi-Otic (Virbac) was
reported to eliminate S. intermedius, P. aeruginosa, and M. pachudermansP»
Three ceruminolytic ear cleansers (Panotic, Pfizer; Cleary Cleanser, DVM Pharmaceuticals; Cerumenex, Purdue-Fredericks) with a variety of ingredients including propylene
glycol, DSS, carbamide peroxide, or triethanolamine caused middle ear damage when
administered directly into the middle ear of normal dogs and guinea pigS.106 Squalene
(Cerumene, EVSCO), a milder surfactant cleanser, caused no significant middle ear pathology when administered in the same way to normal dogs or guinea pigS.106 The clinical
significance of these findings is unknown, because labeled manufacturer's guidelines for
the products were not used, and the products were not used as they would be in clinical
practice (e.g., the products were injected into the middle ear and left there-no flushing
was performedj."
Propylene glycol, glycerin, and mineral oil have mild ceruminolytic effects and are
best used for the relatively normal, slightly dirty ear. Veterinary cleaners that are mild and
can be sent home are listed in Table 19-10. Although these products are mild wax
removers, they still have ingredients, such as propylene glycol, which may be ototoxic if
they allowed to remain in the middle ear. For chronic control of excess cerumen, ceruminolytic agents administered two or three times weekly are usually effective.
Most ceruminolytics and detergents are contraindicated with a ruptured tympanum.
Some disinfectant cleaners, such as chlorhexidine and iodophors, are also contraindicated
with a ruptured tympanum. 75. 89 Frequently, the condition of the tympanic membrane
cannot be determined until the ear canal has been cleaned. When a rupture is suspected,
these agents should not be used. In some cases, a ruptured tympanic membrane is not
detected until after these agents have already been used. The probability of ototoxicity
may be decreased by thorough flushing with water or sterile physiologic saline. Additional
detergents or disinfectants are not used in the flushing water or saline unless an intact
tympanum is noted. The use of ear loops, flushing the ear with water or saline, or the use
of a suction apparatus is the least ototoxic method of cleaning if a ruptured tympanum is
suspected.
Several methods for removing the pus, debris, and emulsified waxes and lipids have
been described. One of the easiest to set up, implement, and clean up is the use of a
rubber ear bulb syringe. After the use of a ceruminolytic agent, repeated flushing with
lukewarm water or saline removes most of the exudate. When the tympanic membrane is
known to be intact, the use of a detergent or disinfectant solution may improve the
results. A space should always be left between the rubber nipple and the canal orifice.
This allows back flow and helps prevent excessive pressure on the tympanic membrane.
This procedure is not effective for cleaning false middle ears or the tympanic bulla. Ear
curets or loops are helpful in removing debris lodged deep near the tympanum in cases of
milder, waxy, crusty accumulation with small foreign bodies or leftover waxy debris. For
larger foreign bodies or keratin plugs in the middle ear, an alligator forceps may be used.
However, in most situations, an ear curet is preferred. If the tympanum is ruptured, the
animal may be noticed to swallow when flushing is performed or fluid may run out of the
nose. Thus, if the animal is anesthetized, it is important to have a tracheal tube in place
to prevent possible aspiration pneumonia.
The ear curet is gently pulled along the epidermis to break loose any debris. This is
less traumatic than using cotton swabs. Ear curets are placed down the ear canal through
a surgical otoscope head. Under visualization, the loop is passed along the epithelium of

1224 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

the canal until the wax to be removed is reached. The loop is then rolled over the debris
and gently pulled out of the canal. This method minimizes the risk of damaging an intact
tympanum.
A feeding tube and a 12-ml syringe are effective for flushing the ear canal. Feeding
tubes of various diameters, cut to different lengths, can be kept in cold sterilization. The
tube, attached to a syringe filled with water or saline, is passed through a surgical
otoscope head and cone and passed down the ear canal under visualization. After the tip
is located at the desired point of the ear canal, the solution can be infused and then
aspirated back out, along with the debris that was broken up. In severe cases, and
whenever the tympanum is ruptured, flushing with a syringe and feeding tube is the most
effective and safe flushing technique and is usually the method of choice (see Fig. 196F).77 This will allow retrograde flushing and, if the tube is placed into the middle ear
cavity, allows flushing of the middle ear cavity. The tip of the tube should be directed
toward the ventral aspect of the tympanic bullae as the more delicate structures are
located in the middle and dorsal compartments of the middle ear cavity (see Fig. 19-6E).
This is a preferred method for drying the ear out, as well, especially when there is no
tympanum present.
Vestibular syndrome or deafness may occur after ear flushing, even when no ototoxic
drugs are used. These side effects are rare and are usually transient when they do occur.
In 105 otitic dog ears cleaned and examined, none had detectable damage to hearing as
assessed by brainstem auditory evoked response testing, and cleaning actually produced
measurable improvements in several dogs. 66 Ototoxicity is a much talked about subject.103• 104. 118 However, the prevalence of ototoxicity secondary to the use of flushing
solutions, cleaning, and medications when a ruptured tympanic membrane exists is unknown. Two separate studies have evaluated the effects of chlorhexidine-P and gentamicin 145 in normal dogs with ruptured tympanic membranes. No cochlear or vestibular
dysfunction was measurable after 3 weeks of otic application of these two agents. In
clinical practice, ototoxicity following cleaning or treatment appears to be rare. 80
A suction apparatus is possibly the most effective method of cleaning ears, especially
when thick, inspissated pus or keratin plugs are left in the middle ear. A Frazier suction
tip works well. The tip can be positioned to exactly the desired location before initiating
suction. Suction may also be combined with tube flushing, and this is a very effective
cleaning method and the treatment of choice when ceruminolytics must be avoided. The
suction apparatus is effective in rapidly cleaning out the external ear canal and the middle
ear cavity. The disadvantages are the limited access to the middle ear, the time needed to
clean the equipment, and when used alone, the lack of infusion of liquid.
Some clinicians use a dental water propulsion device (Water Pik). These devices
rapidly clean the ear with multiple rapid pulses of water. There is no suction, and the
time needed to set up and clean the equipment eliminates some of the advantages they
seem to offer. It is not as effective in cleaning the middle ear as are the syringe and
feeding tube. Care must be taken to avoid directing the pulsating stream directly onto a
damaged tympanic membrane. The use of a curved water current defuser (Anthony
Products) helps avoid tympanic membrane damage.
After the flushing has been completed, the ear canal is dried, or in cases complicated
by infection, a disinfectant may be applied to the canal. If the tympanum is ruptured,
acetic acid at 2% to 5% is preferred. A 5% concentration of acetic acid may cause a
burning sensation when it is applied to inflamed, eroded, or ulcerated epithelium and is
best applied while the patient is still sedated.
After the ear is cleaned and relatively dry, topical medications or drying agents can be
used. Most drying agents contain isopropyl alcohol and one or more of the following:
boric acid, benzoic acid, salicylic acid, acetic acid, aluminum acetate, sulfur, and silicone
dioxide. By reading the labels, the major ingredients and, therefore, activity of the products can be determined. Veterinary products of the drying or drying cleanser type include
Cleary ear drying solution (DVM Pharmaceuticals), Bur-Otic Astringent ear drops (Virbac), Dermal Dry (Butler), Domeboro Otic (Dome), and Otic-Care B drying cream (ARC

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1225

Labs). These products can be used at home for prophylactic treatment of swimmer's ear
and idiopathic excessive cerumen production and as a deodorizer. Alcohol and higher
concentrations of the acids may be irritating or cause a burning sensation in ulcerated
ears. For chronic control of moist ears, drying agents applied twice weekly are usually
effective.
Modified drying products with less drying ingredients and more antimicrobial properties and mild ceruminolytic agents are available. Ingredients often combined with the
drying agents achieve these effects and include propylene glycol, lanolin, glycerin, parachlorometaxylenol, and chlorhexidine. Some of the veterinary products in this group are
listed in Table 19-10. These products are used most effectively in mildly dirty ears. Ears
that have a mild objectionable odor to the client are helped by these products. They are
not as helpful for clinical otitis externa, although they may be used for long-term management of milder cases of recurrent waxy otitis externa, after the inflammation is controlled.
An advantage of these products is their lack of antibiotics or glucocorticoids, which may
induce bacterial resistance or adrenal suppression, respectively.
In especially waxy or exudative ears, the client may need to clean the ears intermittently so that topical medications can be properly applied. In most chronic cases, the
combination cleanser-dryers are not sufficient. In these cases, the client should be instructed in the use of the ear bulb syringe for home flushing and possibly the use of
ceruminolytics.?? These cases must be carefully selected. In general, the tympanum should
be intact if ceruminolytics are going to be used. This is because the client may not be
able to rinse adequately all residual drug, and repetitive application could be dangerous,
especially if the agent is not being rinsed out. The client must be willing and able to try
flushing, and the animal must be tolerant of the procedure. Many animals tolerate home
flushing after the initial inflammation and pain are resolved. This procedure is rarely
recommended in acutely inflamed or ulcerated ears. Detergents are not routinely used for
home flushing and necessitate thorough rinsing. The clients use cotton balls or swabs only
in areas that they can visualize, not down the ear canal.
Owners should rarely clean the ears more than once every 48 hours. With more
frequent applications, the ears often do not have an opportunity to dry out, and the
resultant increased humidity, epithelial maceration, and facilitation of microbial growth
promote delayed healing, irritation, and secondary infection.
Topical Therapy

Numerous topical preparations for the external ear canal are available.P!" Most of the ear
products contain various combinations of glucocorticoids, antibiotics, antifungals, and parasiticides (Tables 19-12 to 19-15). Topical therapeutic agents are selected on the basis of
the effects needed. As the case progresses, the patient should be monitored and products
changed accordingly. Each of these types of ingredients is discussed, but the clinician
should be aware of the vehicle.
The base or type of vehicle should be considered when selecting a treatment of otitis
externa. In general, dry, scaly, crusty lesions are benefited by oil or ointment bases, which
help moisturize the skin. Moist, exudative conditions should be treated with solutions or
lotions and not occlusive ointments or oils. Creams are frequently poor choices because
the client may have difficulty in getting the medication to the horizontal canal. In addi-

• Table 19-12

OTIC GLUCOCORTICOID PREPARATIONS

DRUG (COMPANY)

INGREDIENTS

Bur-Otic HC Ear Treatment (Virbac)

Hydrocortisone, acetic acid, Burow's solution, propylene
glycol
Hydrocortisone, lactic acid
Hydrocortisone
Fluocinolone, dimethyl sulfoxide

Epi-Otic HC (Virbac)
Hydro-If) Mist (Butler)
Synotic Otic Solution (Fort Dodge)

I 226 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

• Table 19-13

OTIC ANTIMICROBIAL-GLUCOCORTICOID
PREPARATIONS

DRUG (COMPANY)

INGREDIENTS

Clear; Ear Drying Solution (DVM)
Forte-Topical (Pharmacia & Upjohn)
Gentocin Otic Solution (Schering-Plough)
"Neo-Predef (Pharmacia & Upjohn)
Otomax (Schering-Plough)
Panalog Ointment (Fort Dodge)
Topagen Ointment (Schering-Plough)
Tresaderm (Merial)
Tritop (Pharmacia & Upjohn)

Acetic acid, colloidal sulfur, hydrocortisone
Penicillin, neomycin, polymyxin B, hydrocortisone
Gentamicin, betamethasone
Neomycin, isoflupredone
Gentamicin, betamethasone, clotrimazole
Nystatin, neomycin, thiostrepton, triamcinolone
Gentamicin, betamethasone
Thiabendazole, neomycin, dexamethasone
Neomycin, isoflupredone, tetracaine

'Ophthalmic product, excellent for ears.

tion, many clients find the application of fluid drops aesthetically more pleasing compared
with the application of viscous materials or the need to insert an applicator down the ear
canal.
Topical glucocorticoids are beneficial in most cases of otitis extema (see Tables 19-12
and 19-13). Glucocorticoids have antipruritic and anti-inflammatory effects, decrease
exudation and swelling, cause sebaceous gland atrophy, decrease glandular secretions,
reduce scar tissue, and decrease proliferative changes, all of which help promote drainage
and ventilation. Because pain and pruritus are alleviated, the animal becomes easier to
medicate. There are different types and potencies of topical glucocorticoids available,
which the clinician should become familiar with. The more potent topical glucocorticoids
in ear products include betamethasone valerate (Gentocin Otic and Otomax, ScheringPlough), and fluocinolone acetonide (Synotic, Fort Dodge). Studies have shown that even
the moderately potent glucocorticoids triamcinolone acetonide (Panolog, Fort Dodge) and
dexamethasone (Tresaderm, Merial) are absorbed systemically (see Chap. 3).121 Treated
dogs have elevated levels of liver enzymes and suppressed adrenal response to corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH]) stimulation. The systemic absorption of more
potent topical glucocorticoids should make the clinician cautious of long-term treatment.
The initial therapy or acute exacerbations may necessitate a potent topical glucocorticoid
(fluocinolone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, or triamcinolone) but, after the inflammation or allergic reaction is controlled, prophylactic or long-term therapy should use the
least potent topical glucocorticoid possible, such as 0.5% or 1% hydrocortisone, contained
in Hydro B-1020 (Butler), Bur-Otic HC and Epi-Otic HC (Virbac), Cleary ear drying
solution (DVM Pharmaceuticals), and CortiAstrin solution (Vedco). Stronger than these
hydrocortisone products, but still milder than the potent glucocorticoids, are combination
products such as Forte-Topical (Pharmacia & UpJohn) and Liquichlor (EVSCO). In cases
of otitis extema due to atopy or food hypersensitivity, the pinna is frequently affected and

• Table 19-14

OTIC ANTIMICROBIAL PREPARATIONS
DRUG (COMPANY)

INGREDIENTS

Betadine Solution (Purdue-Fredericks)
Chloromycetin Otic (Parke-Davis)
Ciloxan Ophthalmic (Alcon)"
Conofite Lotion (Schering-Plough)
Gentocin Ophthalmic (Schering-Plough)t
Nolvasan Solution (Fort Dodge)
Tobrex Ophthalmic (Alcon)"
Xenodine (VPL)

Povidone-iodine
Chloramphenicol
Ciprofloxacin
Miconazole
Gentamicin
Chlorhexidine
Tobramycin
Iodine

• Not a veterinary product, but useful.
fOphthalmic product, but good in ears.

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1227
• Table 19-15

OTIC ANTIPARASITIC PREPARATIONS

PRODUCT (COMPANY)

INGREDIENTS

Aurimite (Schering- Plough)
Cerumite (EVSCO)
Ear Mitecide (Vedco)
Ear Mite Lotion (Durvet)
Eradimite (Fort Dodge)
Mita-Clear (Pfizer)
Nolvamite (Fort Dodge)
Otomite (Virbac)

Pyrethrins, benzocaine, dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate
Pyrethrins, squalene
Rotenone
Rotenone
Pyrethrins
Pyrethrins
Pyrethrins
Pyrethrins

should be treated. Antibiotic agents are present in many topical ear products. Uncomplicated cases of allergic or ceruminous otitis extema may be managed by topical glucocorticoid application alone, and inappropriate use of topical antibiotics may cause a secondary
superinfection or sensitization. All other concerns about the use of topical glucocorticoids
should be considered (see Chap. 3).
Topical antibacterial agents are indicated when infection is present (see Tables 19-13
and 19_14).151a The aminoglycosides-neomycin (Panolog, Fort Dodge; Tresaderm, Merial), neomycin-polymyxin (Forte-Topical, Pharmacia & Upjohn), and gentamicin (Gentocin
Otic Solution and Otomax, Schering-Plough)-and chloramphenicol (Liquichlor, EVSCO)
are potent topical antibiotics with good activity against pathogens usually found in otitis
externa.Pv 55, 83, 142 Chloramphenicol (Liquichlor, EVSCO) is frequently effective, but may
stimulate excessive granulation tissue in the middle ear."? Clients should also be careful
not to come in contact with chloramphenicol owing to the possibility of idiosyncratic bone
marrow suppression. Using topical antibiotics that are not likely to be needed as systemic
drugs may decrease the occurrence of resistant cases of otitis extema and otitis media.
The more potent broad-spectrum antibiotics (gentamicin and chloramphenicol) should not
be used as first-choice treatments so that resistant strains of bacteria are not created.
Therefore, neomycin-polymyxin is preferred by the authors as a first-line topical antibiotic.
Most topical antibiotics contain a glucocorticoid, and its potency may not always be
desirable.
Gram-negative, gentamicin-resistant infections are the bane of many practitioners. In
Scotland, 81% of the Pseudomonas isolates from canine otitis extema are resistant to
gentamicin and Huoroquinolones.P' The typical response is to look for an antibiotic the
organism is susceptible to. Multiple studies have shown that Pseudomonas is usually
susceptible to polymyxin B, and this antibiotic is often overlooked in the treatment of
difficult Pseudomonas cases.v- 71, 95 One possible reason is that polymyxin B is inactivated
by pus and should be used in only clean ears. Ticarcillin was shown to be effective either
topically or topically and systemically in 11 of 12 dogs with Pseudomonas infections
resistant to fluoroquinolones and gentamicin. l 24 An injectable form or the equine uterine
infusion (Ticillin, pfizer Animal Health) may be used as ear dropS.82, 124 The Ticillin is
reconstituted to 100 mg/ml and this is stable for one month if frozen. It may be divided
into 10 to 15 ml vials, which are stable in the refrigerator for 3 days, so clients must
freeze the vials and bring a new one out every 3 days for treatment. Other antibiotic
regimens that are useful include injectable amikacin (50 mg/ml) applied at 3 to 5 drops in
each ear every 12 hours, Tobramycin ophthalmic drops, and in-office formulated enrofloxacin drops.t- 82,133, 151a Topical enrofloxacin is made by adding 4 ml of the 2.27% injectable enrofloxacin (20 mg/ml) (Baytril, Bayer) to 12 ml of a liquid base (such as propylene
glycol and water; Epiotic, Virbac; or Clear; ear drying solution, DVM Pharmaceuticals; or
24 ml saline if the tympanic membrane may be rupturedr.?" 84 The risk of ototoxicity has
not been evaluated, but none is reported.
Treatment options are available that do not depend on alternative antibiotics, but
frequent cleaning should not be forgotten. Presoaking the ear with tromethamine-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (Tris EDTA, Derma Pet) for 5 to 10 minutes or mixing

1228 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

gentamicin at 3 mg/ml with Tris EDTA increases the efficacy against gram-negative
organisms.P'" Tris EDTA solution is made from the commercial preparation or from stock
chemicals by mixing 4.8 g of EDTA (disodium salt), 24.2 g of Tris (Trizma) base, 3900 ml
distilled water, and 100 ml white vinegar." The pH of this mixture is then adjusted to 8.0
with additional vinegar. The pH-balanced solution should then be autoclaved so that
sterilization is achieved. Tris EDTA has also been shown to be synergistic with amikacin,
neomycin, cephaloridine, kanendomycin, and enrofloxacin.v" 142 Tris EDTA can be valuable in long-term treatment and prevention of recurrence as part of an ear cleaning
regimen or as a presoak before instillation of antibiotic (usually two to three times a
week).
Topical antiseptics such as povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine, aluminum acetate, and
acetic acid are helpful in the treatment of bacterial otitis extema (see Table 19_14).151a
Acetic acid has been effective in the treatment of otitis extema in humans. It is believed
that its activity is not completely due to the pH because other acidic products are not as
effective in killing Pseudomonas and Staphylococcus. Acetic acid is most effective against
Pseudomonas, with a 2% solution being lethal within 1 minute of contact. 7l · 77 Staphylococcus and Streptococcus can be killed within 5 minutes of contact with 5% acetic acid
solution. However, this concentration is occasionally irritating. In vitro studies indicated
that mixtures of boric acid and acetic acid were effective antibacterial agents: 0.5% boric
acid with 0.5% acetic acid was lethal for P. aeruginosa; 5% boric acid with 0.5% acetic
acid was lethal for S. intermedius. 53 Aluminum acetate has also been shown to be as
effective as polymyxin and hydrocortisone ear drops in a group of acute otitis extema
cases in humans that were often associated with swimming, and 34% also had Pseudomonas pyocyanea infections." Stinging from the aluminum acetate drops resulted in their
being discontinued in 5% of the cases treated. Silver sulfadiazine at 1% has been reported
to be an effective antimicrobial in cases of otitis externa.v- 148 It is active against P.
aeruginosa, Proteus spp., enterococci, and S. intermedius. It is made by mixing 0.1 g of
silver sulfadiazine powder with 100 ml of distilled water or 1.5 ml ( 1/3 teaspoon) of silver
sulfadiazine cream with 13.5 ml distilled water, and applying the solution at a dose of 0.5
ml per ear twice daily." Another study showed that a 0.1 % solution is also effective and is
more liquid, allowing easier application and better dispersal in the ear canal.P' Occasional
erosive, severe inflammatory reactions can be seen in ears treated with silver sulfadiazine,
but ototoxicity has not been reported.
Antifungal agents are required in any case complicated or caused by the yeasts
Malassezia and Candida or by dermatophytes (see Tables 19-13 and 19-14),151a Malassezia and dermatophytes usually respond well to topical 1% miconazole (Conofite lotion,
Schering-Plough) or clotrimazole (Otomax, Schering-Plough). In vitro testing has shown
nystatin (Panolog, Fort Dodge) to be effective against Malassezia. Thiabendazole (Tresaderm, Merial), although not effective in vitro, may work in some cases. Again, povidoneiodine or chlorhexidine is also effective. When bacteria and Malassezia are present together, the combination of gentocin, clotrimazole, and betamethasone (Otomax,
Schering-Plough) or neomycin, thiostrepton, nystatin, and triamcinolone (Panalog, Fort
Dodge) is effective, as is povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine, or 5% acetic acid. For chronic,
recurrent bacterial or yeast infections, antimicrobial agents used two or three times weekly
may be effective.
Parasiticidal agents are indicated in ear products for Otodectes and, less commonly,
Demodex, Otobius, and trombiculid infestations (see Table 19-15). Most cases respond to
products containing pyrethrins (Otomite Plus, Virbac, Cerumite, EVSCO; Mita-Clear,
Pfizer Animal Health; Otic-Care M, ARC Labs), rotenone (Ear Mitecide, Phoenix; Ear
Mitecide, Vedco; Ear Mite Lotion, Durvet), and thiabendazole (Tresaderm, Merial). In
addition to the use of an effective parasiticidal agent, two important points should be
considered. First, many animals may be asymptomatic carriers of Otodectes. Because of
this, all in-contact animals, both dogs and cats, must be treated. Second, Otodectes can be
found on other body areas. Therefore, whole-body treatments with effective parasiticidals
must be done. The life cycle of Otodectes necessitates that otic and body treatment be
continued for at least 3 weeks, with a month being necessary in some cases. Some

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1229
veterinarians recommend topical application of ivermectin (drops in the ears), especially in
cats. Although this may be effective, one study showed that the recurrence rate was
higher and the time to remission slower than with systemic ivermectin therapy." Amitraz
(1 ml of amitraz in 9 to 29 ml of mineral oil) is also effective when applied as otic
drops." Fipronil spray may eliminate ear mites both from the ear and the body with one
application. Selamectin is reported to be effective after one or two applications.

Systemic Therapy
Systemic therapy is indicated if otitis extema is severe, marked proliferative changes are
present, otitis media is present, when owners cannot administer topical treatments, and in
cases in which topical adverse reactions are suspected. Appropriate antibiotics or antifungals should be used until at least 1 week after cure. Antibiotics that are known to
penetrate bone or that have a good history of benefit in treating otitis media should be
selected and given at doses that are at the high end of the recommended doses. Examples
of antibiotics that are useful for otitis media and proliferative otitis include trimethoprimsulfadiazine, 25 mglkg every 12 hours; ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine (Primor, Pfizer Animal Health), 55 mglkg day 1 and 25 mglkg every 24 hours subsequent days; clindamycin
(Antirobe, Pharmacia & Upjohn), 7 to 10 mglkg every 12 hours; cephalexin, 22 mglkg
every 12 hours; enrofloxacin (Baytril, Bayer Corporation), 5 to 20 mglkg every 24 hours;
and orbifloxacin (Orbax, Schering-Plough) 2.5 to 12.5 mglkg q24h. In general, fluoroquinolones are needed at higher doses for Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, such as 20 mgt
kg enrofloxacin, 12.5 mglkg orbifloxacin, or 20 mglkg ciprofloxacin q24h. 71 • 150 Marbofloxacin at 5 mglkg every 24 hours has shown encouraging results for treating Pseudomonas
otitis. GO The use of acupuncture with conventional otitis therapy was shown in a blinded
study to decrease the signs and symptoms of otitis more rapidly than conventional therapy
alone.P' However, the overall success and cure rate at 3 months was no different between
groups. Ketoconazole (Nizoral, Janssen) at 10 mglkg every 12 to 24 hours is given when
otitis media is associated with Malassezia. In unresponsive cases, itraconazole (Sporanox,
Janssen) may be effective. Otoscopic and cytologic examination is required before a
patient can be considered cured.
Ivermectin, although not approved for this use in the United States, is an extremely
effective systemic therapy for Otodectes infection (see Chap. 6). When given subcutaneously at 0.3 mglkg and repeated three times at 1O-day intervals, it eradicates the ear
mites. This form of therapy treats the whole pet and eliminates a carrier state; therefore,
it can be used to rule out Otodectes infection. In some recurrent cases related to ear
mites the use of ivermectin in all the household pets was rewarding. Collies, Shetland
sheepdogs, Old English sheepdogs, other herding breeds, and crosses of these breeds
should not be treated with high-dose ivermectin. Systemic therapy with moxidectin at 0.2
to 0.4 mglkg SQ or PO at 10 day intervals or every 72 hours for 7 treatments is also
effective."
Systemic glucocorticoid therapy is indicated when there is markedly inflamed edematous otitis and when chronic pathologic changes cause marked stenosis of the canal
IUmen.151a Oral prednisone or prednisolone, 1 to 2 mglkg PO, or triamcinolone acetonide
0.1 to 0.2 mglkg PO, may be given daily for 4 to 7 days, then tapered to alternate-day
regimens. This treatment is continued until the proliferative tissue has resolved or has
stopped improving. Some cases of allergic otitis extema may be treated with systemic
glucocorticoids, allowing the initial topical therapy to be a low-potency glucocorticoid
product. Injectable dexamethasone is useful if only 2 to 3 days' action is required. For the
uncommon case of stenosis, primarily of the vertical canal, or when systemic glucocorticoids are ineffective in reducing the proliferative tissue, intralesional triamcinolone acetonide may be helpful."? Triamcinolone acetonide is particularly effective for inhibiting
fibroblasts and reducing collagen production.
Isotretinoin (Accutane, Roche) and etretinate (Tegison, Roche) have been helpful in a
limited number of cases of otitis extema. Isotretinoin was used in a few dogs and cats that
had histologic evidence of sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Although it appeared to be helpful, its administration was stopped owing to side effects or expense. One study of etretin-

1230 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

ate in Cocker spaniels with primary keratinization disorders indicated that the ceruminous
otitis extema in these dogs did not improve.P" However, in these cases, other perpetuating factors were not adequately treated. Etretinate is no longer available in the United
States. When the ears are repetitively cleaned and concurrent infections are treated,
retinoids may be more beneficial. Further work and studies with synthetic retinoids are
indicated (see Chap. 3).
Surgery

Surgical procedures that may promote drainage or ventilation are described in most
surgical textbooks. It should be emphasized that surgical procedures do not replace a
thorough diagnostic work-up and that case selection should be done carefully. In cases
with marked proliferative changes of the medial wall, surgical debridement is indicated.
Surgery is also indicated to alleviate stenosis of the canal, to remove tumors or polyps,
to improve ventilation and response to medical therapy, and to manage medically resistant
otitis media. It is imperative for the best results that the primary diagnosis is determined
before surgery. Many animals have undergone surgical procedures only to continue to
experience otitis extema. Although these cases may sometimes be easier to treat after the
procedure, clients not properly educated about expectations may be unsatisfied with the
results. Even cases that have been successfully ablated may have persistent pruritus and
inflammation of the pinna.?" 97
Lateral ear canal resection eliminates the lateral wall of the vertical canal. It is
successful in approximately 50% of cases, and clients should be warned of the relatively
high failure rate. 99 When the procedure is performed early in disease before the development of otitis media or other perpetuating factors, it is much more successful.P In one
study, lateral resection failed in 86.5% of the Cocker spaniels, but Shar peis tended to
have a better outcome than other breeds.P" It is indicated when there is a stenotic
vertical ear canal or when medical management is not effective and improvement of
drainage and ease of topical application may help the medical management. It may
decrease the humidity of the ear canal by up to 10%. Contraindications are stenotic
horizontal ear canals, otitis media, and severe proliferative disease or mineralization of the
auricular cartilage. The most important step is to make certain that the opening to the
canal is as wide as possible and that there is skin-to-skin apposition to decrease scar tissue
formation. The cartilage flap must be pulled ventrally, and skin-to-skin apposition should
be obtained.
Vertical canal ablation may be indicated if the primary disease is limited to the
vertical canal. This procedure removes a larger area of tissue and may reduce sensitivity
that was associated with the medial wall of the vertical canal. A study reported improvement in 95% of cases so treated.I" Elimination of signs occurred in only 23% of patients,
with the other patients requiring continued medical therapy. However, medical therapy
was easier to carry out or was needed less frequently.l':' It is not commonly recommended
by the authors. When horizontal canal stenosis or otitis media is present, other procedures
are indicated. One should not amputate at the horizontal canal but at the last centimeter
of the vertical canal. It is better to leave two drain boards, both dorsal and ventral.
Total ear canal ablation is often recommended in dogs with end-stage ear disease that
is poorly or completely unresponsive to aggressive cleaning and medical therapy. In some
animals with significant hearing loss that require frequent cleanings, this salvage procedure
is less expensive and often preferable as a long-term solution. It is often combined with a
bulla osteotomy and curettage of the tympanic bulla, which decreases the incidence of
postoperative infections and fistula formation.I" 85, 108, III A major reason for not recommending total ablations has been the concern with hearing loss. Hearing loss is significant
but not usually complete.s" 112, 113 Although this may be a problem in normal dogs, this is
a minor concern in dogs with chronic diseases.P!
Dehiscence of the surgical wound after total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
osteotomy is common.w- Wound contamination may be an important contributing factor
in postoperative dehiscence. One study demonstrated that during surgery, there is substantial contamination of subcutaneous tissue with bacteria (E. coli or Streptococcus canis

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 123I

FIGURE 19-1 I. Acquired folding of the pinna in a cat with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.

contamination in 94% of the surgical procedures) from excised tissues of the osseous
bulla. 149a

Acquired Folding of the Pinna
Acquired folding of the pinnae ("flop-eared" cats) occurs in adult cats. 125, 138 A sudden,
bilateral, lateral folding over of the distal one third of the pinnae is seen (Fig. 19-11).
The folded portion of the pinna is cool, thin, and palpably devoid of cartilage. All cats
have received long-term (8 months to 2 years) daily applications of glucocorticoid-containing otic preparations. Serum cortisol responses to ACTH are depressed, suggesting the
presence of iatrogenic secondary adrenocortical insufficiency and iatrogenic Cushing's
syndrome. Stopping the glucocorticoid therapy mayor may not result in any improvement
of the pinnal folding.

FIGURE 19-12. Congenital microtia in a Dachshund. Left pinna is
smaller than the right pinna.

1232 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears

Miscellaneous
Congenital microtia was seen in a Dachshund (Fig. 19-12).

• REFERENCES
Eyelids
1. Abegneli PL: Pathologie des paupieres chez les carnivores domestiques. Rev Med Vet 165:217, 1989.
2. Angarano DW: Dermatologic disorders of the eyelid
and periocular region. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 678.
3. Bistner SI: Diseases of the nasolacrimal system. In:
Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy V. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1974, p 488.
4. Bond R, et al: An idioipathic facial dermatitis of 13
persian cats. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur Coli
Vet DermatoI14:155, 1997.
5. Charbonne L, Clerc B: Les blepharites des carnivores
domestiques. Point Vet 20:33, 1988.
6. de Geyer G: Dermatologie des paupieres du chien et
du chat. Premiere partie: Etude generale. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 28:605, 1993.
7. de Geyer G: Dermatologie des paupieres du chien et
du chat. Deuxieme partie: Etude speciale. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 28:613, 1993.
8. Dugan SJ, et al: Variant nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis in four dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
29:403, 1993.
9. Gardiner CH, et al: Onchocerciasis in two dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 203:828, 1993.
10. Gelatt KN: Histiocytoma of the eyelid of a dog. Vet
Med (Small Anim Clin) 70:305, 1975.
11. Gerdin PA, et al: Survey and topographic distribution
of bacterial and fungal microorganisms in eyes of
clinically normal dogs. Canine Pract 18:34, 1993.
12. Hirai T, et al: Apocrine gland tumor of the eyelid in
a dog. Vet Pathol 34:232, 1997.
13. Johnson BW, Campbell KL: Dermatoses of the canine eyelid. Comp Cont Educ 11:385, 1989.
14. Kakoma I, et al: Identification of staphylococci and
micrococci from eyes of clinically normal dogs: Relative frequency of isolation, J3-lactamase production,
and selected antimicrobial sensitivity profiles. Canine
Pract 18:11, 1993.
15. Ketring KL: Diseases of the eyelids. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders
Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 546.
16. Lawson DD: Canine distichiasis. J Small Anim Pract
14:469, 1973.
17. Lenehan TA, Tarvin G: Personal communication,
1993.
18. McLaughlin, SA, et al: Eyelid neoplasms in cats: A
review of demographic data (1979 to 1989). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 29:63, 1993.
19. Moore CP: Qualitative tear film disease. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 20:565, 1990.
20. Rothstein E, et al: Tetracycline and niacinamide for
the treatment of sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:540,
1997.
21. Scott DW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal

Dermatology V. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1995.

Claws
22. Bergvall K: Treatment of symmetrical onychomadesis
and onychodystrophy in five dogs with omega-3 and
omega-6 fatty acids. Vet Dermatol 9:263, 1998.
23. Boord M: Personal communication, 1993.
24. Boord MJ, et al: Onychectomy as a therapy for symmetric claw and claw fold disease in the dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 33:131, 1997.
25. Carlotti D: Nail diseases in the dog and cat: Differential diagnosis and treatment. Proceedings, William
Dick Bicentenary, Edinburgh, July, 1993.
25a. De Jonghe SR, et al: Trachyonychia associated with
alopecia areata in a Rhodesian Ridgeback. Vet DermatollO:123, 1999.
26. Evans LM, Caylor KB: Polycythemia vera in a cat
and management with hydroxyurea. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 31:434, 1995.
27. Foil CS, Conroy J: Dermatoses of claws, nails, and
hoof. In: Von Tscharner C, Halliwell REW(eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I. Bailliere Tindall,
Philadelphia, 1990, p 420.
28. Harvey RG, Markwell PJ: The mineral composition of
nails in normal dogs and comparison with shed nails
in canine idiopathic onychomadesis. Vet Dermatol 7:
29,1996.
29. Griffin CE: Claw diseases. Presentation, European
School of Advanced Veterinary Studies, Luxembourg,
1994.
30. Griffin CE: Malassezia paronychia in atopic dogs. J
Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:78, 1997.
31. Mueller RS, et al: Microanatomy of the canine claw.
Vet Dermatol 4:5, 1993.
32. Mueller R, Olivry T: Onychobiopsy without onychectomy: Description of a new biopsy technique for canine claws. Vet DermatollO:55, 1999.
33. Mueller RS, et al: Evaluation of the pathogenesis of
canine claw disease-a prospective study of 24 dogs.
Proc Ann Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am
Coli Vet DermatoI14:83, 1998.
34. Rosychuk RAW: Diseases of the claw and claw fold.
In: Bonagura JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary
Therapy XII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995,
p 641.
35. Scott DW, Miller WH: Disorders of the claw and
clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Educ 14:449, 1992.
36. Scott DW, Miller WH: Disorders of the claw and
clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
37. Scott DW, Foil CS: Claw diseases in dogs and cats.
In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology, Vol 3. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 406.
38. Scott DW, et al: Symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
in dogs: A retrospective analysis of 18 cases (19891993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:194, 1995a.
38a. Vicek T, et al: Symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
in two sibling Rottweilers. Vet Pathol 34:5, 1997.

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1233

Anal Sacs
39. Anderson RK: Anal sac disease and its related dermatoses. Comp Cont Educ 6:829, 1984.
40. Duijkeren E: Disease conditions of canine anal sacs. J
Small Anim Pract 36:12, 1995.
41. Greer WB, Calhoun ML: Anal sacs of the cat (Felis
domesticus). Am J Vet Res 27:773, 1966.
42. Hajsig M, Lukman P: Pityrosporum pachydermatis
(P. canis) in the inflamed canine anal sacs. Vet Arch
50:43, 1980.
43. Harvey CEo Incidence and distribution of anal sac
disease in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:573,
1974.
44. Lukman P: Nalazista glijvice Pityrosporum canis u
organizuma zdravih i bolenith pasa. Vet Arch 52:37,
1982.
45. Montagna W, Parks H: A histochemical study of the
glands of the anal sac of the dog. Anat Rec 100:297,
1948.
46. Muse R: Anal gland disease and anal pruritus. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Dermatology. Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, 1998, p 186.
47. Ross JT, et al: Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine
glands of the anal sac in dogs: A review of 32 cases. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:349, 1991.
48. Seim HB: Diseases of the anus and rectum. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W. B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 916.
49. Titkemeyer C: Applied anatomy of the perianal region
of the dog. Mich St Univ Vet 18:162, 1958.
50. Vercelli A: Perianal diseases in dogs. Proc Eur Soc
Vet Dermatol Eur Coil Vet DennatoI14:51, 1997.

Ear Canals
51. Ascher F, et al: Mise au point et etude experimentale
d'une formulation destinee au traitement des otites
externes du chien et du chat. Partie 1. Eptdemtologie
et microbiologie. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 23:267,
1988.
52. August JR: Diseases of the ear canal. In: Complete
Manual of Ear Care. Veterinary Learning Systems,
Princeton Junction, NJ, 1986, P 37.
53. Benson CEo Susceptibility of selected otitis externa
pathogens to individual and mixtures of acetic and
boric acids. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dennatol Am Coil Vet DennatoI14:121, 1998.
54. Blanco JL, et al: Microbiological diagnosis of chronic
otitis externa in the dog. Zentralbl Veterinarmed 43:
475,1996.
55. Blue JL, Wooley RE: Antibacterial sensitivity patterns
of bacteria isolated from dogs with otitis externa. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 177:362, 1977.
56. Bornand V: Bacteriologie et mycologie de l'otite externe du chien. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 134:341,
1992.
57. Bourdeau P, et al: The probable role of environmental conditions in the efficacy of treatment of Otodectes cynotis infestation in dogs: An example with moxidectin (Cydectin) in 50 dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet
Dennatol Eur Coil Vet DennatoI15:149, 1998.
58. Boyanowski KJ, et al: Ceruminolytic agents. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 34:281, 1998.
59. Breitwieser F: Ergebnisse bakteriologischer und mykologischer Untersuchungen bei der Otitis externa
des Hundes. Tierarztl Prax 25:257, 1997.
60. Carlotti DN, et al: Marbofloxacin for the systemic
treatment of Pseudomonas spp. suppurative otitis externa in the dog. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Ad-

vances in Veterinary Dennatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 463.
61. Carlotti DN, Taillieu-LeRoy S: L'otite externe chez Ie
chien: Enologie et clinique, revue biblographique et
etude retrospective portant sur 752 cas. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 32:243, 1997.
62. Chang HJ, et al: An epidemic of Malassezia pachydermatis in an intensive care nursery associated with
colonization of health care workers' pet dogs. N Engl
J Med 338:757, 1998.
63. Chesney CJ: The intimate envelope: Water and skin.
In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds). Advances in Veterinary
Dennatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 47.
64. Cole LK, et al: Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibity patterns of isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs with otitis
media. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:5348, 1998.
65. Cole LK, et al: Kirby-Bauer and minimum inhibiting
concentration susceptibility testing of enrofloxacin on
isolated bacterial pathogens from dogs with chronic
otitis externa and otitis media. Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dennatol Am Coil Vet Dennatol
14:123, 1998.
66. Eger CE, Lindsay P: Effects of otitis on hearing in
dogs characterized by brainstem auditory evoked response testing. J Small Anim Pract 38:380, 1997.
67. Farca AM, et al: Potentiating effect of EDTA-Tris on
the activity of antibiotics against resistant bacteria associated with otitis, dematitis and cystitis. J Small
Anim Pract 38:243, 1997.
68. Fernando SDA: A histological and histochemical
study of the glands of the external auditory canal in
the dog. Res Vet Sci 7:116, 1966.
69. Fernando SDA: Certain histopathologic features of
the external auditory meatus of the cat and dog with
otitis externa. Am J Vet Res 28:278, 1967.
70. Fernando SDA: Microscopic anatomy and histochemistry of glands in the external auditory meatus of the
cat (Felis domesticus). Am J Vet Res 26:1157, 1965.
71. Foster AP, DeBoer DJ: The role of Pseudomonas in
canine ear disease. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 20:
909,1998.
72. Franc M, et al: Tumeurs du conduit auditif externe
des carnivores. Rev Med Vet 132:733, 1981.
73. Fraser G: The histopathology of the external auditory
meatus of the dog. J Comp Pathol 71:253, 1961.
74. Frost RC: Canine otoacariasis. J Small Anim Pract 2:
253, 1961.
75. Galle HG, Venker-van Haagen AJ: Ototoxicity of the
antiseptic combination chlorhexidinelcetrimide (SavIon): Effects on equilibrium and hearing. Vet Q 8:56,
1986.
76. Gram D, et al: Treatment of ear mites in cats: A
comparison of subcutaneous and topical ivermectin.
Vet Med 89:1122, 1994.
77. Griffin CEo Otitis externa and media: In: Griffin CE,
et al (eds): Current Veterinary Dennatology. MosbyYear Book, St. Louis, 1993, p 245.
78. Griffin CE: Principles for treatment of the diseased
ear canal. In: Complete Manual of Ear Care. Veterinary Learning Systems, Princeton Junction, NJ, 1986,
P 61.
79. Griffin CE, et al: Otitis in dogs and cats. CD ROM,
CLIVE, University of Edinburgh, 1998.
80. Griffin CE, Song MD: Management of otitis externa.
In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary

1234 • Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears
Dermatology III. Butterworth Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 369.
81. Griffin CEo Etiology and pathogenesis of otitis. In:
Griffin CE, et al (eds): Otology Medicine and Surgery. Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas,
1998, p 3."
82. Griffin CEo Pseudomonas otitis therapy. In: Bonagura
JD (ed): Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII.
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 2000, p 586.
83. Grono LR: Otitis extema. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 461.
84. Hayes HM [r, Pickle WJ: Effects of ear type and
weather on the hospital prevalence of canine otitis
extema. Res Vet Sci 42:294, 1987.
85. Holt D, et al: Lateral exploration of fistulas developing after total ear canal ablations: 10 cases. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:527, 1996.
86. Huang HP, little CJL: Effects of fatty acids on the
growth and composition of Malassezia pachydermatis
and their relevance to canine otitis extema. Res Vet
Sci 55:119, 1993.
87. Huang HP, et al: The relationship between microbial
numbers found on cytological examination and microbial growth density on culture of swabs from the
external ear canal in dogs. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol 10:81, 1993.
88. Huang HP, et al: The application of an infrared tympanic membrane thermometer in comparing the external ear canal temperature between erect and pendulous ears in dogs. In: Kwochka KK, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology III. Butterworth
Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 57.
89. Igarashi Y, Oka Y: Vestibular ototoxicity following intratympanic applications of chlorhexidine gluconate in
the cat. Arch Otorhinolaryngol 242:167, 1985.
90. Jeffers JG, et al: A dermatosis resembling juvenile
cellulitis in an adult dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:
204,1995.
91. Johnson A, Hawke M: An Ink impregnation study of
the migratory skin of the external auditory canal of
the guinea pig. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockholm) 101:269,
1986.
92. Johnston DE: Early lateral drainage prodecure for
chronic otitis extema in dogs. Proc Eur Coli Vet Surg
4:38, 1995.
93. Kapatkin AS, et al: Results of surgery and long-term
follow-up in 31 cats with nasopharyngeal polyps. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:387, 1990.
94. Kiss G, et al: Characteristics of Malassezia pachydermatitis strains isolated from canine otitis extema. Mycoses 39:313, 1996.
95. Kiss G, et al: New combination for the therapy of
canine otitis extema. I. Microbiology of otitis extema.
J Small Anim Pract 38:51, 1997.
96. Kowalski JJ: The microbial environment of the ear
canal in health and disease. Vet Clin N Am Small
Anim Pract 18:743, 1988.
97. Krahwinkel DJ, et al: Effect of total ablation of the
external acoustic meatus and bulla osteotomy on auditory function in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:949,
1993.
98. Lambert IJ: A comparison of the treatment of otitis
extema with 'otosporin' and aluminium acetate: A Report from a services practice in Cyprus. J R Coli Gen
Pract 31:291, 1981.
99. Layton CE: The role of lateral ear resection in man-

aging chronic otitis extema. Semin Vet Med Surg
Small Anim 8:24, 1993.
100. Leonardi L, et al: Neoplasia involving the ear canal of
dogs and cats: Histological and immunohistochemical
evaluation of 23 cases. Proc Eur Soc Vet Dermatol
Eur Coli Vet Dermatol 14:195, 1997.
101. little CJL, Lane JG: An evaluation of tympanometry,
otoscopy, and palpation for assessment of the canine
tympanic membrane. Vet Rec 124:5, 1989.
102. little CJL, et al: Inflammatory middle ear disease of
the dog: The clinical and pathological features of cholesteatoma, a complication of otitis media. Vet Rec
128:319, 1991.
102a. Lloyd DH, Lamport AI: Evaluation in vitro de
l'activite antimicrobienne de topiques cutanes et auriculaires chez le chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
34:259, 1999.
102b. Lloyd DH, et al: Antimicrobial activity in vitro and
in vivo of a canine ear cleanser. Vet Rec 143:111,
1998,
103. Logas DB: Diseases of the ear canal. Vet Clin N Am
Small Anim Pract 24:905, 1994.
104. Mansfield PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats. Comp
Cont Educ 12:331, 1990.
105. Mansfield PD, et al: Infectivity of Malassezia pachydermatis in the external ear canal of dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:97, 1990.
106. Mansfield PD, et al: The effects of four commercial
ceruminolytic agents on the middle ear. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 33:479, 1997.
107. Marino DJ, et al: Results of surgery and long-term
follow-up in dogs with ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:560, 1993.
108. Marino DJ, et al: Results of surgery in cats with
ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 30:54, 1994.
109. Mathison PT, et al: Development of a canine model
for Pseudomonas otitis extema. Proc Annu Memb
Meeting Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 11:21, 1995.
110. Matsuda H, et al: The aerobic bacterial flora of the
middle and external ears in normal dogs, J Small
Anim Pract 25:269, 1984.
Ill. Matthiesen DT, Scavelli T: Total ear canal ablation
and lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:257, 1990.
112. McAnulty JF, et al: Wound healing and brainstem
and evoked potentials after experimental total ear canal ablation with lateral tympanic bulla osteotomy in
dogs. Vet Surg 24:1, 1995.
113. McAnulty JF, et al: Wound healing and brainstem
and evoked potentials after experimental ventral tympanic bulla osteotomy in dogs. Vet Surg 24:9, 1995.
114. McCarthy RJ, Caywood DD: Vertical ear canal resection for end-stage otitis extema in dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 28:545, 1992.
115. McKeever PJ, Richardson HW: Otitis extema, part 2:
Clinical appearance and diagnostic methods. Companion Anim Pract 2:25, 1988.
116. McKeever PJ, Richardson HW: Otitis extema, part 3:
Ear cleaning and medical treatment. Companion
Anim Pract 2:24, 1988.
117. McKeever PJ, Torres S: Otitis extema, part 1: The
ear and predisposing factors to otitis extema. Comp
Anim Pract 2:7, 1988.
118. Merchant SR: Medically managing chronic otitis extema and media. Vet Med 92:518, 1997.
119. Merchant SR, et al: Ototoxicity assessment of a chlor-

Diseases of Eyelids, Claws, Anal Sacs, and Ears • 1235
hexidine otic preparation in dogs. Prog Vet Neurol4:
72,1993.
120. Moisan PG, Watson GL: Ceruminous gland tumors in
dogs and cats: A review of 124 cases. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 32:448, 1996.
121. Moriello KA, et al: Adrenocortical suppression associated with topical otic administration of glucocorticoids
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:329, 1988.
122. Muse R, et al: The prevalence of otic manifestations
and otitis externa in allergic dogs. Proc Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coil Vet DermatoI12:33, 1996.
123. Noxon JO, et al: Minimal inhibitory concentration of
silver sulfadiazene on Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphyloccus intermedius isolates from the ears of
dogs with otitis externa. Proc Am Acad Vet Dermatol
Am Coil Vet Dermatol 13:72, 1997.
124. Nuttall TJ: Use of ticarcillin in the management of
canine otitis externa complicated by Pseudorrwnas aeruginosa. J Small Anim Pract 39:165, 1998.
125. Pearson T: Floppy pinnae in Siamese cats. Vet Rec
143:456, 1998.
126. Pope ER: Feline inflammatory polyps. Companion
Anim Pract 19:33, 1989.
127. Poulet FM, et al: Focal proliferative eosinophilic dermatitis of the external ear canal in four dogs. Vet
Pathol 28:171, 1991.
128. Powell MB, et al: Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodectes cynotis infestation of cats and mode of feeding.
Am J Vet Res 41:877, 1980.
129. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Clin 20:
1525, 1990.
130. Rausch FD, Skinner GW: Incidence and treatment of
budding yeast in canine otitis externa. Mod Vet Pract
59:914, 1978.
131. Remedios AM, et al: A comparison of radiographic
versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 27:183, 1991.
132. Rose WR: Surgery I-myringotomy. Vet Med Small
Anim Clin 72:1646, 1977.
133. Rosychuck RAW: Management of otitis externa. Vet
Clin North Am 24:921, 1994.
134. Sanchez-Araujo M, Puchi A: Acupuncture enhances
the efficacy of antibiotics treatment for canine otitis
crises. Acupunct Electrother Res 22:191, 1997.
135. Schulte A: Neoplasien im Ohr der Katze. KleintierPraxis 33:407, 1988.
136. Scott DW: Canine sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis. Comp Anim Pract 2:19, 1988.
137. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
138. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1986 to 1988: Looking
to the 1990s through the eyes of many counsellors. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:515, 1990.
139. Scott DW: Observations on canine atopy. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 17:91, 1981.

140. Scott DW. Miller WH Jr: Idiopathic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the cat: literature review and
report of 14 cases (1990-1996). Feline Pract 26:10,
1998.
141. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Idiosyncratic cutaneous adverse drug reactions in the dog: literature review and
report of 101 cases (1990-1996). Canine Pract 24:16,
1999.
141a. Spangler EA, Dewey CW: Meningoencephalitis secondary to bacterial otitis media/interna in a dog. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 36:239, 2000.
142. Sparks TA, et al: Antimicrobial effect of combinations
of EDTA-Tris and amikacin or neomycin on the microorganisms associated with otitis externa in dogs.
Vet Res Comm 18:241, 1994.
143. Spruell JSA: Treatment of otitis media in the dog. J
Small Anim Pract 5:107, 1964.
144. Stout-Graham M, et al: Morphologic measurements
of the external horizontal ear canal of dogs. Am J Vet
Res 51:990, 1990.
145. Strain GM, et al: Ototoxicity assessment of a gentamicin sulfate otic preparation in dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:
532, 1995.
146. Strickland JH, Calhoun ML: The microscopic anatomy of the external ear of Felis domesticus. Am J Vet
Res 21:845, 1960.
147. Sylvestre AM: Potential factors affecting the outcome
of dogs with a resection of the lateral wall of the
vertical ear canal. Can Vet J 39:157, 1998.
148. Thomas ML: Development of a bacterial model for
canine otitis externa. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 6:28,
1990.
149. van der Gaag I: The pathology of the external ear
canal in dogs and cats. Vet Q 8:307, 1986.
149a. Vogel PL, et al: Wound contamination and antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria cultured during total
ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1641, 1999.
150. Walker RD, et al: Pharmacokinetic evaluation of enrofloxacin administered orally to healthy dogs. Am J
Vet Res 53:2315, 1992.
151. Weisbroth SH, et al: Immunopathology of naturally
occurring otodectic otoacariasis in the domestic cat. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 165:1088, 1974.
151a. White PD: Medical management of chronic otitis in
dogs. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:716, 1999.
152. Wolschrijn CF, et al: Comparison of air and bone
conducted brain stem auditory evoked responses in
young dogs and dogs with bilateral ear canal obstruction. Vet Q 19:158, 1997.
153. Swaim SF, Bradley DM: Evaluation of a closed-suction drainage for treating auricular hematomas, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:36, 1996.

Chapter

20
Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic
Tumors

• CUTANEOUS ONCOLOGY
Veterinary oncology has come into its own as a specialty. Detailed information on the
etiopathogenesis and immunologic aspects of neoplasia is available in other publications 1- 4 , 6. 7 and therefore is not presented here. This chapter is an overview of canine and
feline cutaneous neoplasia as well as non-neoplastic tumors.
The combined incidence rates (the number of new cases of a disease diagnosed in 1
year divided by the population at risk and expressed as cases per 100,000 of the population at risk) for benign and malignant neoplasms in dogs and cats were reported to be
about 1077 and 188, respectively.f 6, 7, 32 Thus, dogs have about six times as many
neoplasms as do cats, The incidence rates for canine and feline skin neoplasms are about
728 and 84, respectively.
The peak age period for neoplasm occurrence in dogs and cats is 6 to 14 years. The
median ages for cutaneous neoplasm occurrence in dogs and cats are lOV2 years and 12
years, respectively, The frequency of various skin neoplasms differs in dog and cat breeds
(Table 20-1). Canine breeds that have the highest neoplasm incidence are the Boxer,
Scottish terrier, Bull mastiff, Basset hound, Weimaraner, Kerry blue terrier, and Norwegian Elkhound." Siamese and Persians appear to be at risk for certain cutaneous neoplasms in cats.' The overall incidence of neoplasia is greater in female dogs than in male
dogs (56% versus 44%); in cats, however, male cats predominate (56% versus 44%) in
most surveys.v 5, 6, 35
There are no completely satisfactory criteria for distinguishing benign neoplasms from
certain proliferative inflammatory lesions and hyperplastic processes and for distinguishing
benign from malignant neoplasms.v 6, 7 In general, malignant neoplasms are usually characterized by sudden onset, rapid growth, infiltration, recurrence, and metastasis. The most
important criterion of malignancy is metastasis. In dogs, the number of malignant neoplasms is only about half the number of benign neoplasms.P- 6, 7. 32 However, in cats, there
are about three times as many malignant neoplasms as benign neoplasms." 6,7,32,35
The skin is the most common site of occurrence of neoplasms in the dog (about 30%
of the total) and the second most common site in the cat (about 20% of the total)." 6-9,12,
29, 32, 35-38, 41 The most common skin neoplasm in dogs and cats varies somewhat from one
report to another. In general, canine skin neoplasms may be broadly categorized as about
55% mesenchymal, 40% epithelial, and 5% melanocytic in origin, and feline skin neoplasms as 50% epithelial, 48% mesenchymal, and 2% melanocytic. In the dog, the most
common skin neoplasms, in approximate descending order, are lipoma, sebaceous gland
hyperplasia, mast cell tumor, histiocytoma, and papilloma (squamous papilloma and fibropapilloma). In the cat, the approximate order is basal cell tumor, squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor, and fibrosarcoma.
The key to appropriate management and accurate prognosis of cutaneous neoplasms is
specific diagnosis. This can be achieved only by biopsy and histologic evaluation. Exfoliative cytologic techniques (aspiration and impression smear) are easy and rapid, and often
'See references 1, 3, 5- 7, 11, 21, 32, 34.

1236

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1237
• Table 20-1

BREED PREDILECTIONS FOR CUTANEOUS
NEOPLASMS AND NON-NEOPLASTIC LUMPS IN
THE DOG AND CAT

Papilloma
Keratoacanthoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma, glabrous, nonpigmented skin of
trunk (actinic)
Squamous cell carcinoma, clawbed
Feline benign basal cell tumor
Basal cell carcinoma
Trichoepithelioma

Tricholemmoma
Pilomatrixoma
Trichoblastoma
Sebaceous gland tumors

Sweat gland tumors
Circumanal gland tumors

Fibroma
Fibropruritic nodule
Fibrosarcoma
Myxoma or myxosarcoma
Schwannoma
Hemangioma
Hemangioma, glabrous, nonpigmented skin (actinic)
Hemangiosarcoma
Hemangiosarcoma, glabrous, nonpigmented skin (actinic)
Hemangiopericytoma
Lipoma
Liposarcoma
Mast cell tumor

Lymphoma
Plasmacytoma
Histiocytoma

Malignant histiocytosis
Systemic histiocytosis
Cutaneous histiocytosis
Benign fibrous histiocytoma

Cocker spaniel, Kerry blue terrier
Collie, German shepherd dog, Keeshond, Lhasa apso, Norwegian
elkhound, Old English sheepdog, Yorkshire terrier
Scottish terrier, Pekingese, boxer, Poodle, Norwegian elkhound
Dalmatian, bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, beagle

Black Labrador retriever, Black Standard Poodle, Giant Schnauzer,
dachshund, Bouvier de Flandres
Persian, Himalayan
Cocker spaniel, English Springer spaniel, Kerry blue terrier, Poodle, Shetland sheepdog, Siberian husky, Siamese cat
Cocker spaniel, English Springer spaniel, Basset hound, German
shepherd dog, Golden retriever, Irish setter, Miniature Schnauzer, Standard Poodle, Persian cat
Afghan hound
Kerry blue terrier, Old English sheepdog, Poodle
Cocker spaniel, Poodle
Beagle, Cocker spaniel, dachshund, Irish setter, Lhasa apso, Malamute, Miniature Schnauzer, Poodle, Shih tzu, Siberian husky,
Persian cat
Cocker spaniel, German shepherd dog, Golden retriever
Beagle, Cocker spaniel, English bulldog, German shepherd dog,
Lhasa apso, Samoyed, Shih tzu, Siberian husky, Afghan hound,
dachshund
Boston terrier, boxer, Doberman pinscher, fox terrier, Golden retriever
German shepherd dog
Cocker spaniel, Doberman pinscher, Golden retriever
Doberman pinscher, German shepherd
Fox terrier
Airedale terrier, boxer, English Springer spaniel, German shepherd
dog, Golden retriever
American Staffordshire terrier, Basset hound, beagle, Dalmatian,
English Springer spaniel, Greyhound, Saluki, Whippet
Bemese Mountain dog, boxer, German shepherd dog, Golden retriever
See actinic hemangioma
Beagle, Boxer, Cocker spaniel, Collie, Fox terrier, English Springer
spaniel, German shepherd dog, Irish setter, Siberian husky
Cocker spaniel, Dachshund, Doberman pinscher, Labrador retriever, Miniature Schnauzer, Weimaraner, Siamese cat
Brittany spaniel, dachshund, Shetland sheepdog
American Staffordshire terrier, Beagle, Boston terrier, Boxer, Bull
terrier, Dachshund, English bulldog, Fox terrier, Golden retriever, Labrador retriever, Pug, Shar pei, Weimaraner, Siamese
cat
Basset hound, boxer, Cocker spaniel, German shepherd dog,
Golden retriever, Irish setter, Scottish terrier, St. Bemard
Cocker spaniel
American Staffordshire terrier, Boston terrier, boxer, Cocker spaniel, Dachshund, Doberman pinscher, English Springer spaniel,
Great Dane, Labrador retriever, Miniature Schnauzer, Rottweiler, Scottish terrier, Shar pei, Shetland sheepdog, West Highland
white terrier
Bemese Mountain dog
Bemese Mountain dog
Collie, Shetland sheepdog
Collie, Golden retriever
Table continued on follOWing page

1238 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

• Table 20-1

BREED PREDILECTIONS FOR CUTANEOUS
NEOPLASMS AND NON·NEOPLASTIC LUMPS IN
THE DOG AND CAT Continued

Melanocytic tumors

Follicular cyst
Dermoid cyst
Collagenous nevus
Vascular nevus, scrotal
Epidermal nevus
Actinic keratosis
Calcinosis circumscripta
Focal mucinosis

Airedale terrier, Boston terrier, boxer, Chihuahua, Chow Chow,
Cocker spaniel, Doberman pinscher, English Spririger spaniel,
Golden retriever, Irish setter, Irish terrier, Miniature Schnauzer,
Scottish terrier
Boxer, Doberman pinscher, Miniature Schnauzer, Shih tzu
Boxer, Kerry blue terrier, Rhodesian Ridgeback
German shepherd dog
Airedale terrier, Kerry blue terrier, Labrador retriever, Scottish
terrier
Miniature Schnauzer, Pug
American Staffordshird terrier, Basset hound, Beagle, Bull terrier,
Dalmatian
Boston terrier, Boxer, German shepherd dog
Doberman pinscher, Shar pei

provide valuable information about neoplastic cell type and differentiation. The techniques, methods, and interpretation used in cytologic studies have been beautifully described and illustrated (see Chap. 2).42a-46a However, exfoliative cytologic evaluation is
inferior to and is no substitute for biopsy and histopathologic examination. Historical and
clinical considerations often allow the experienced clinician to formulate an inclusive
differential diagnosis on a cutaneous neoplasm but variability renders such "odds playing"
unreliable. In short, "a lump is a lump" until it is evaluated histologically.
The detailed histopathologic description of canine and feline cutaneous neoplasms is
beyond the scope of this chapter. Only the histopathologic essence of individual neoplasms
is presented here. For in-depth information and photomicrographic illustrations, the
reader is referred to other texts on cutaneous neoplasia'<" 42 and the individual references
cited for each neoplasm.
The use of markers-enzyme histochemical and immunohistochemical methods for
identifying specific cell types - has increased and has facilitated the diagnosis of many
neoplastic conditions in dogs and cats. 47 - 64 Examples of these markers are presented in
Chapter 2.
Clinical management of cutaneous neoplasms may include surgery, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, radiotherapy, laser therapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy (Table 20-2), hyperthermia, phototherapy, and combinations of these. Detailed information on the various
treatment modalities is available in a number of excellent references.v 6. 7, 25. 41a Brief
comments on treatment are included under clinical management for each tumor.
The .crucial difference between normal and neoplastic cells stems from discrete
changes in specific genes controlling proliferation and tissue homeostasis.l':' More than

• Table 20-2

IMMUNOTHERAPY AGENTS USED IN CANINE
AND FELINE NEOPLASIA

PRODUCT NAME

ACTIVE INGREDIENT

INDICATIONS

TOXICITY

Acemannan Immunostimulant
(Carrington Laboratories,
Dallas, Texas)
ImmunoRegulin (VetoquinolImmunovet, Tampa, Florida)
Regressin-V (Vetrepharm Research, Athens, Georgia)

Polymannose

Fibrosarcoma

Discomfort, decreased activity,
vomiting, loose stools

Propionibacterium acnes

Neoplasia"

Fever, chills, anorexia, lethargy

Nonpathogenic Mycobacteria spp.

Neoplasia"

'Off-labeL
Modified from VanKampen KR: Immunotherapy and cytokines. Sem Vet Med Surg 12:186, 1997.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1239

100 such cancer-related genes have been discovered. Two principal types of growthregulating genes have been associated with the pathogenesis of neoplasia: oncogenes
encode proteins that convey various growth advantages, while tumor-suppressor genes
encode proteins that restrict cell proliferation and differentiation.l?"
The p53 tumor-suppressor gene is the most striking and well-studied example, and
mutations of this gene occur in about 50% of all cancer types in humans. 107, 114 Tumorsuppressor genes are vulnerable sites for critical DNA damage because they normally
function as physiologic barriers against clonal expansion or genomic mutability, and they
are able to hinder growth and metastasis of cells driven to uncontrolled proliferation by
oncogenes. p53 participates in many cellular functions: cell cycle control, DNA repair,
differentiation, genomic plasticity, and programmed cell death. p53 is an important component in a biochemical pathway or pathways central to carcinogenesis, and p53 mutations
provide a selective advantage for clonal expansion of preneoplastic and neoplastic cells.
Overexpression of p53 is positively associated with gene mutation. Overexpression of
p53 was detected in most canine squamous cell carcinomas and circumanal gland adenocarcinomas.l'" Mutations in p53 were found in most feline and canine squamous cell
carcinomas.P" In a recent study, p53 mutations were found in only 3 of 20 feline
neoplasms .181
Cyclins are associated with and activate various cyclin-dependent kinases at various
phases of the cell cycle.'?' In humans, overexpression of cyclin D and downregulation of
cyclin E expression may be involved in keratinocyte carcinogenesis. 101
The apoptotic index and mitotic index of various benign and malignant canine skin
neoplasms were compared.l'" In general, there was an inverse relationship between apoptotic index and mitotic index in benign neoplasms, and no correlation in malignant
neoplasms. Thus, classification of canine skin neoplasms according to their apoptotic and
mitotic indices did not reflect the clinical behavior of some tumor types .

• EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS
Papilloma

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Since the mid-1980s, great advances have been made concerning the understanding and
classification of papillomaviruses in animals and humans.P: 77. 84 Differentiation of papillomavirus types by cleavage patterns produced by treating viral DNA with restriction endonucleases and the in vitro hybridization of viral DNA have emphasized the heterogeneity
of papillomaviruses within animal genera. In dogs, at least five types of papillomaviruses
tend to have site specificity on the animal as well as histologic speciflcity.f 84 It would
appear that multiple feline papillomaviruses exist.83.83a The papillomaviruses are transmitted by direct and indirect (via fomites) contact. In general, infection occurs in damaged
skin. The incubation period varies from 1 to 2 months."
No in vitro system for papillomavirus propagation is available. Detection methods
differ dramatically in their sensitivity." Southern blot hybridization is highly specific and
sensitive, but it is time-consuming and does not allow detection of DNA segments of
unknown types. Dot blot and reverse blot hybridization have good sensitivity and reasonable accuracy, but are also laborious. In situ hybridization is less sensitive than Southern
blot, but does allow identification of cells harboring viral DNA. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) is the most widely used technique, but it is not as sensitive as the others.
Papillomavirus is fairly stable in the environment and can survive for 63 days at 4 to
8°C or for 6 hours at 37°C.77 Humoral immunity (neutralizing antibodies) protects against
viral challenge but does not play a role in clearance of established lesions." Cellular
immunity is of key importance in papilloma regression. 77 Papillomavirus vaccines (live or
formalin-inactivated) are effective preventives, but are of no known therapeutic benefit."?
There is great interest and much research in the role of papillomaviruses and onco-

1240 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

genesis. 73 The viral genome can be divided in parts labeled as L (later region), E (early
region), and LCR (long control region). The Ll and L2 genes encode for viral capsid
proteins, and E region consists of genes involved in regulation of viral DNA replication
(E1 and E2) or cell proliferation and immortalization (E6 and E7). In addition, E2
protein is an important viral transcription factor regulating expression of E6 and E7
oncogenes. E4 protein binds keratins and facilitates production of virions by disrupting
normal cell differentiation. E6 and E7 proteins have oncogene potential and can interfere
with cellular factors involved in the control of cell proliferation and the prevention of cell
immortalization. E6 and E7 oncogenes are capable of immortalizing cells, inducing cell
growth, and promoting chromosomal instability in the host cell. E6 oncoprotein causes
degradation of p53 protein by the cellular ubiquitin proteolysis system, leading to unblocking of cell division and host DNA synthesis, which results in chromosomal instability and
accumulation of various mutations in affected cells.
Papillomaviruses appear to be involved in the etiology of certain forms of squamous
cell carcinoma in dogs and cats (see Squamous Cell Carcinoma)."?
Severe or unusual forms of papillomatosis have been seen in dogs with IgA deficiency
or receiving glucocorticoids or cancer chemotherapy.P 72, 74, 82, 84, 85 It would appear that
glucocorticoids and immunosuppression can exacerbate latent infections and cause expansion of the tissue tropism of the virus.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Cutaneous papillomas (warts and verrucae) are common in the dog, and at least five
syndromes are recognized clinically. Canine oral papillomatosis is common and affects
young dogs with no apparent breed or sex predilection. Lesions are almost always multiple
and affect the buccal mucosa, the tongue, the palate, the pharynx, the epiglottis, the lip,
the nasal planum, the skin, the eyelids, the conjunctiva, and the cornea (Fig. 20-1A and
C).I, 5-7, 84 The lesions begin as white, flat, smooth, shiny papules and plaques of a few
millimeters in diameter and progress to whitish gray, pedunculated or cauliflower-like
hyperkeratotic masses up to 3 cm in diameter. The surface of well-developed lesions is
covered by fronds of hyperkeratosis. Florid oral papillomatosis has been seen in Beagles in
association with IgA deficiency.82,84 Severe oral papillomatosis with generalized cutaneous
papillomas (same virus) was seen in a young Shar pei in association with glucocorticoid
therapy.P Multiple papillomas were reported in the face, inguinal, and perineal region of
a dog receiving cancer chemotherapy.P
Cutaneous papillomas occur uncommonly in older dogs and are more common in
male dogs, Cocker spaniels, and Kerry blue terriers.v"- 12, 27, 31. 33 Cutaneous papillomas
may be Single or multiple, occurring mainly on the head, the eyelids, and the feet (Fig.
20-1B). They are usually pedunculated or cauliflower like, firm to soft, well circumscribed, alopecic, and smooth to keratinous; they are usually smaller than 0.5 cm in
diameter. Papillomavirus has been identified in the lesions.?" 77, 84, 86
Cutaneous inverted papillomas are usually seen in dogs 8 months to 3 years of age,
with no apparent breed or sex predilection.s" 79 Lesions occur commonly on the ventral
abdomen and the groin; are small (1 to 2 em in diameter), raised, and firm; and contain a
central pore opening to the surface of the skin (Fig. 20-2). DNA hybridization studies
with a canine oral papillomatosis virus probe revealed that cutaneous inverted papillomas
are due to a different papillomavirus from that causing canine oral papillomas.
Multiple pigmented, papular, cutaneous papillomas associated with a novel papillomavirus were seen in a 6-year-old boxer receiving long-term systemic glucocorticoids. 70 The
lesions were black, rounded, had a waxy surface, and occurred on the ventrum. The
papillomas spontaneously regressed 3 weeks after glucocorticoid administration was
stopped.
Multiple pigmented plaques associated with papillomavirus infection has been reported
in miniature Schnauzers and Pugs (Fig. 20-3).75 The condition has been reported in an

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1241

FIGURE 20-1. A, Severe oral viral papillomatosis in a young dog. B, Squamous papilloma on the hock of
an old dog. C, Viral papilloma on the lip of a young dog. D, Multiple squamous papillomas on the footpads
of a young dog. E, Two keratoacanthomas on the dorsal neck of an Old English sheepdog. The lesion at the
left has an overlying cutaneous hom. F, Squamous cell carcinoma on the nose of a collie. G, Squamous cell
carcinoma on the nose of a cat. H, Squamous cell carcinoma on the tip of the pinna of a white cat.

1242 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-2. Inverted papillomas near the prepuce of a young dog.

Enghsh setter," and the authors have seen cases in the Shar pei (Fig. 20-4). Lesions
often begin at 2 to 4 years of age, and are most common on the ventrum and medial
thighs. Melanotic macules and plaques become progressively more scaly and hyperkeratotic. This condition appears to be identical to that previously referred to as "pigmented
epidermal nevi" and "lentigines."2, 5 In miniature Schnauzers and Pugs, the condition
appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion." Some lesions may undergo
malignant transformation into squamous cell carcinomas. 75, 87 This syndrome appears to be
very similar to epidermodysplasia verruciformis in humans."
Multiple papillomas have been recognized on the footpads of adult dogs." Lesions
were firm, hyperkeratotic, and often hornlike in appearance. They occurred on multiple
footpads of two paws or more (see Fig. 20-1D). Larger lesions were associated with
lameness. These papillomas have not been definitively shown to be caused by viruses.
Occasionally, cutaneous horns may overlie papillomas.

FIGURE 20-3. Pigmented viral
papillomas on the leg of a Pug.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1243

FIGURE 20-4. Multiple pigmented viral papillomas on the thigh
and abdomen of a Shar pei.

Although cutaneous viral papillomas are usually benign, apparent transformation into
squamous cell carcinoma has been recognized in some canine cases." 6, 77.84 Some dogs
treated with a live virus vaccine that was made from papillomavirus isolated from naturally
occurring oral papillomas experienced squamous cell carcinomas at the sites of vaccine
inoculation.P: 77, 84 This did not occur when formalin-inactivated vaccines were used."?
Rare cases of viral papillomatosis have been completely unresponsive to treatment, perhaps owing to immunologic defects (Fig. 20_5),74,77
Cat

There are at least two types of papillomaviruses in domestic cats: oral (FdPV-2) and skin
(FdPV_l).83a Tongue lesions occur in 6-month to 9-year-old cats, and are multifocal, small
(4 to 8 mm), soft, light pink, oval, slightly raised, and flat-topped. The ventral tongue is
usually affected, Solitary cutaneous papillomas are rare in cats, and most are not known to
be caused by papillomaviruses.P" 27, 35, 39 Papillomavirus was identified in one eyelid papilloma of a cat,68 Lesions are seen in adult cats with no apparent breed, sex, or site
predilection. The papillomas are solitary, pedunculated to cauliflower like, well circumscribed, and hyperkeratotic; they are smaller than 0.5 cm in diameter.

FIGURE 20-5. Multiple viral
papillomas in an immunosuppressed,
aged Shar pei,

1244 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

Multiple viral papillomas were first reported in cats in 1990.67 Affected cats are
middle-aged to old, and no breed or sex predilections are reported.f" 69,71 Multiple lesions
can occur anywhere on the body, especially the head, neck, dorsal thorax, ventral abdomen, and proximal limbs, The lesions vary from 3 mm to 3 cm in diameter, begin as
melanotic macules, and evolve into plaques, which become progressively more scaly,
hyperkeratotic, and occasionally, greasy. Recent information indicates that these viral
papillomas are the precursors to feline multicentric squamous cell carcinoma (Bowen's
disease) (see Squamous Cell Carcinomaj.P'
Occasionally, cutaneous horns overlie papillomas."

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations in dogs include keratoacanthoma, trichofolliculorna, cutaneous hom, lentigo, and melanocytic neoplasm, whereas in cats, they include
mast cell tumor, cutaneous hom, dilated pore of Winer, and melanocytic neoplasm.
Histologically, papillomas may be divided into squamous and fibrous types. 1, 2, 5-7 Squamous papillomas (the most common type) are characterized by papillated (exophytic
papilloma) or plaquelike (verruca plana, or flat wart) epidermal hyperplasia and papillomatosis, with variable degrees of ballooning degeneration (koilocytosis) and giant, clumped,
pleomorphic keratohyahne granules (Figs. 20-6 and 20-7).1, 2, 5 Basophilic intranuclear
inclusion bodies are variable findings. Inverted papillomas (endophytic papilloma) are cupshaped lesions with a central core of keratin. I, 66 The cup is lined by mature squamous
epithelium with centripetal papillary projections, ballooning degeneration, abnormal keratohyaline granules, and variable intranuclear inclusion bodies. Keratoacanthomas are histo-

FIGURE 20-6. Canine viral squamous papilloma. Note papillomatosis and vacuolated keratinocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1245

FIGURE 20-7. Canine viral squamous papilloma. Note ballooning degeneration and clumping of keratohyaline granules.

lOgically similar but lack evidence of viral infection. Idiopathic squamous papillomas are
histologically identical to viral squamous papillomas, except that they lack evidence of
virus infection (ballooning degeneration, abnormal keratohyaline granules, and intranuclear
inclusion bodies)." Routine use of immunohistochemical or PCR techniques would greatly
reduce the number of "idiopathic" cases. Fibropapilloma (fibrous polyp) is characterized
by a fibroma-like proliferation of collagen with papillomatosis and papillated epidermal
hyperplasia (Fig. 20-8). The recently reported pigmented papular papillomas have a
unique, cup-shaped appearance with marked parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, angular baso-

FIGURE 20-8. Canine flbropapilloma. Papillomatous proliferation of epidermis and fibroblasts.

1246 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
philic intranuclear inclusion bodies, eosinophilic fibrillar cytoplasmic inclusions (modified
keratin protein), and scarce keratohyalin granules (Figs. 20-9A and B).70 The multiple
macular and plaquelike papillomas show a typical squamous papilloma configuration with
marked epidermal melanosis and giant keratohyalin granules (Figs. 20-10A and B).75
The feline multiple viral papillomas are characterized early by focal, abrupt, plaquelike
epidermal and infundibular hyperplasia and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, hypermelanosis, ballooning degeneration, and abnormal keratohyaline granules (Fig. 20_11).67.69.71. 83a
Basophilic intranuclear inclusions and gray intracytoplasmic inclusions (proliferating cytokeratin filaments) are variably present. Fine, coalescent, pink, fibrillar, intracytoplasmic
masses first appear in the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum and become irregular,
solitary, large, and amphophilic in the stratum granulosum.
Papillomavirus antigen can be detected by immunohistochemical techniques in
viral papillomas." However, other techniques, such as peR, are much more sensitive.P
Papillomavirus has also been detected in some canine and feline squamous cell carcinomass" 78. 86 but not in canine basal cell tumors, hair follicle neoplasms, sebaceous gland
tumors, or sweat gland neoplasms." Papillomas are positive for cytokeratln.P' "
"See references 66, 67, 69-71, 75-82, 84, 86.

FIGURE 20-9. A, Pigmented
papular viral papilloma from an immunosuppressed dog. B, Close-up of
A. Koilocytosis, intranuclear, and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1247

FIGURE 20-10. A, Pigmented viral
papilloma from a Shar pei. Note sudden transition from normal skin (right)
to papilloma (left). B, Close-up of A.

FIGURE 20-11. Feline viral
papilloma. Note the "flat wart" appearance with hyperkeratosis and
koilocytosis within the stratum granulosum.

1248 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of papillomas may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v" Canine oral papillomatosis usually undergoes
spontaneous regression within about 3 months, and solid immunity follows experimental
or natural infection.I" 85 Autogenous or commercially produced wart vaccines and immunomodulating drugs (e.g., levamisole and thiabendazole) are without documented therapeutic value. Live virus vaccines produced from canine oral papillomas are protective but
have been associated with injection site squamous cell carcinomas.t" 84. 85 Formalin-inactivated papillomavirus vaccine administered intradermally afforded complete protection
against natural and experimental infection and produced no injection site squamous cell
carcinomas.?" 85 In certain cases with large masses of proliferating tissue, eating and
maintaining oral hygiene may be facilitated by surgically removing some of the larger
papillomas, which is usually performed by cryosurgery or electrosurgery. There is absolutely no evidence to suggest that the removal or crushing of some papillomas causes early
regression of the others. Reports have indicated that intralesional injections of bleomycin,
5-fluorouracil, or interferon, as well as the oral administration of levamisole or retinoids,
are beneficial to humans with recalcitrant papillomas.?" Retinoids have been reported to
be effective in the treatment of canine inverted papillomas.P" Canine inverted papillomas
have also been reported to regress spontaneously." Anecdotal reports indicate that interferon (Roferon-A, Hoffman-LaRoche), 1.5 to 2 million units/m- BSA given subcutaneously
3 times a week, is effective for the treatment of severe cases of oral or cutaneous viral
papillomatosis, or both (see Chap. 3).88

Keratoacanthoma
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Keratoacanthomas (intracutaneous cornifying epitheliomas, or infundibular keratinizing
acanthomas) are uncommon benign neoplasms of the dog. I, 4-7, 92 It has been suggested
that these neoplasms are of hair follicle origin. 2 There are unsubstantiated references to
the occurrence of keratoacanthomas in the cat. The cause of keratoacanthomas is unknown, although the generalized forms may have a hereditary basis in dogs and humans.
Immunohistochemical studies failed to identify papillomavirus antigen. 66 , 78,80

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Usually, these neoplasms occur in dogs 5 years of age or younger. Male dogs are more
commonly affected than female dogs. The incidence is higher in purebred dogs and
particularly in the Norwegian Elkhound and Keeshond, which are predisposed to the
generalized form. I, 4-7, 27, 92 However, the generalized form has also been recognized in the
German shepherd dog and Old English sheepdog.s 6, 27 Collies, Lhasa apsos, and Yorkshire terriers are also reported to be at risk for the solitary form. I, 5
Although keratoacanthomas are usually solitary, they may be multiple in the Norwegian Elkhound, Keeshond, German shepherd dog, and Old English sheepdog (see Fig.
20-1E). Most tumors occur on the back, the neck, the thorax, and the limbs. There is
considerable variation in the gross appearance of keratoacanthomas. Most of the tumors
appear as firm to fluctuant, well-circumscribed dermal or subcutaneous masses varying
from 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter, with a pore opening onto the skin surface that ranges from
less than 1 mm to several millimeters in diameter. The opening usually contains a hard
keratinized plug, varying from small and inconspicuous to large and hornlike. Superficial
lesions with large keratinous plugs are easily mistaken for cutaneous horns. Some of the
tumors are entirely dermal or subcutaneous, do not communicate with the surface of the
skin, and are easily confused with cysts. Keratoacanthomas are not invasive or metastatic.
However, in the generalized form (up to 50 lesions) a recurrent problem should be
anticipated, because affected dogs tend to have new tumors at other sites throughout their
lives.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1249

DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnostic considerations include papillomas, trichofolliculomas, cutaneous
horns, and cysts. Histopathologically, keratoacanthomas are characterized by a keratinfilled crypt in the dermis that opens to the skin surface (Fig. 20_12).1,2.33,92 The wall of
the crypt is composed of a thick, complex, folded layer of well-differentiated stratified
squamous epithelium, with columns of squamoid cells projecting peripherally from the
basal surface of the wall and forming small epithelial nests (Fig. 20-13). The major
histopathologic differential is the inverted papilloma.'- 66 However, the keratoacanthoma
does not have ballooning degeneration, abnormal keratohyaline granules, or intranuclear
inclusion bodies, Keratoacanthomas are positive for cytokeratin.'?

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of keratoacanthomas may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrotherapy, and observation without treatment.v ? Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide
and prednisone and immunotherapy with autogenous vaccine or levamisole have been
ineffective in dogs." The oral administration of retinoids or intralesional injections of 5fluorouracil or methotrexate have provided good results in the treatment of keratoacanthomas in humans." The oral administration of retinoids (isotretinoin or etretinate) has been
successful for the treatment of multiple keratoacanthomas in some dogs (see Chap, 3).7,89,
90, 333 A good response is seen after 3 to 4 months of therapy, and treatment must be
continued intermittently for life in most cases. Keratoacanthomas are also known to
resolve spontaneously.V'"

Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinomas (epidermoid carcinomas) are common malignant neoplasms of
the dog and cat, arising from keratinocytes.'- 2, 3-9, 12, 18, 24, 32, 35 The etiology of squamous
cell carcinoma is not clear in all cases (Table 20-3). Squamous cell carcinoma occurs

FIGURE 20-12. Canine keratoacanthoma. A central keratin-filled crypt opens to the skin
surface.

1250 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-1 J. Canine keratoacanthoma. Note multiple hom cysts and projections of squamoid cells.
(From Weiss E, Frese K: VII. Tumors of the skin. Bull
World Health Organ 50:79, 1974.)

most frequently in sun-damaged skin and is usually preceded by actinic (solar) keratosis."
Thus, squamous cell carcinoma is seen more frequently in geographic areas characterized
by long periods of intense sun exposure. Rarely, squamous cell carcinoma has been
reported to arise from bum scars or chronic infectious prooesses.s 6.109. 122 Squamous cell
carcinoma was reported to arise in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus lesions-" and in
multiple infundibular cystsl 33 in dogs. In humans, squamous cell carcinomas occasionally
'See references 1-9, 12, 18, 24, 32, 35.

• Table 20-3

FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF SQUAMOUS CELL
CARCINOMA
Ultraviolet radiation
Ionizing radiation
Arsenic
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Papillomaviruses
Tobacco (from second-hand smoke)
Lacklloss of pigment
Lacklloss of hair
Genodermatoses (albinism, piebaldism, epidermodysplasia verruciformis)
Chronic ulcer/sinus tract
Scar
Pre-existing chronic dermatitis
Immunosuppression

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1251

arise from bum and frostbite scars, radiation bums, and stasis dermatitis." Papillomavirus
structural antigens were demonstrated in up to 50% of the canine squamous cell carcinomas tested, suggesting an etiologic role for these viruses.I" 81, 86 The results of similar
studies were negative in the cat, 80, 81 However, a recent report indicated that 45% of the
cats with multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) had papillomavirus antigen in their lesions.P' Squamous cell carcinomas occurred at the site of injection of
a live canine oral papillomavirus vaccine in some dogs.55 , 84 Squamous cell carcinomas
occurred in 24% of the feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-infected cats in one study.!"
Naturally occurring oral and conjunctival papillomas in dogs may rarely progress to squamous cell carcmoma." A Ibp deletion was detected in codon 89 in exon 4 of tumorsuppressor gene p53 in a canine squamous cell carcinoma. 121a

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Squamous cell carcinoma occurs at an average age of 9 years, with no sex predilection,
although puppies are rarely affected. us In general, Scottish terriers, Pekingese, Boxers,
Poodles, and Norwegian Elkhounds are predisposed.v" 136 Squamous cell carcinomas with
claw bed origin are seen most commonly in black-coated dogs of large breeds, especially
Labrador retrievers, standard poodles, giant Schnauzers, Dachshunds, and Bouvier de
Flandres.'- 4-7.124,125,132 Short-coated breeds with white or piebald ventral coat and skin
color (Dalmatian, American Staffordshire terrier, Bull terrier, and Beagle) have the highest incidence of solar-induced squamous cell carcinoma.j- 5, 7, 120, 121 These dogs usually
spend many hours a day lying in the sun. Nasal squamous cell carcinomas may rarely
occur as a sequela to depigmentation associated with conditions such as discoid lupus
erythematosus (Fig. 20-14), pemphigus erythematosus, and vitiligo that result in increased
susceptibility to actinic damage.f 134
Lesions occur most commonly on the trunk, the limbs, the digits, the scrotum, the

FIGURE 20-14. Squamous cell
carcinoma arising from chronic, uncontrolled discoid lupus erythematosus.

1252 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

lips, the anus, and the nose (see Fig. 20-1F) and may be proliferative or ulcerative. The
proliferative types are papillary masses of varying size, many of which have a cauliflowerlike appearance. The surface tends to be ulcerated and bleeds easily. Cutaneous horns
may develop on the surface of such lesions. The ulcerative types initially appear as
shallow, crusted ulcers that become deep and crateriform. Squamous cell carcinomas are
usually solitary, but they may be multiple on the trunk of sunbathing dogs or in the claw
beds of large, black-coated breeds. Dogs with claw bed (subungual) squamous cell carcinomas usually have a single affected digit (Fig. 20-15), which is swollen and painful with
a misshapen or absent claw and paronychial discharge, and they may experience multiple
neoplasms in other digits over a period of years (Fig. 20-16). Squamous cell carcinoma is
the most common neoplasm of the digit of the dog. 28
Cat

Squamous cell carcinoma occurs at an average age of 9 years, with no breed or sex
predilection. White cats (short-haired or long-haired cats) have squamous cell carcinoma
about 13 times as frequently as do other cats, owing to increased susceptibility to actinic
damage." The most common sites are the external nares (see Fig. 20-1 G) (about 80% to
90% of affected cats), the pinnae (Fig. 20-1H) (about 50%), the eyelids (Fig. 20-17)
(about 20%), and the lips (Fig. 20-18A).t· 103. 128. 130 Squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
planum is rare (Fig. 20-19).119. 129 Lesions may be proliferative or ulcerative and may
'See references 4-7, 30, 35, 103, 104, 108a, 128, 130.

FIGURE 20-15. Subungual squamous cell
carcinoma in a dog. Digit is enlarged, and claw
has sloughed. (Courtesy C. Foil.)

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1253

FIGURE 20-16. Multiple subungual squamous cell carcinomas in a dog.

FIGURE 20-17. Squamous cell
carcinoma on lower eyelid of a cat.

FIGURE 20-18. A, Squamous cell carcinoma on the upper lip of a cat. The carcinoma arose from a longstanding indolent ulcer. B, Bowen's disease in a cat. Multiple hyperpigmented, hyperkeratotic plaques over the
shoulder (the area has been clipped). C, Basal cell tumor on the neck of a cat. D, Melanotic basal cell tumor on
the rump of a cat. E, Multilobulated malignant trichoepithelioma over the lateral neck and shoulder of a dog. F,
Dilated pore of Winer near the lateral canthus of a cat. Keratinous mass projecting from a surface pore.
G, Multiple sebaceous gland hyperplasias on the face of a dog. H, Melanotic sebaceous epithelioma over the eye
of a dog.

1254

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1255

FIGURE 20-19. Squamous cell
carcinoma of the nasal planum in a
cat.

occasionally have overlying cutaneous horns. Lesions are multiple in about 45% of affected
cats. 7, 103
Generally, squamous cell carcinomas are locally invasive and slow to metastasize. In
dogs and cats, squamous cell carcinomas arising from the digits appear to be more
aggressive and may be misdiagnosed as paronychia or some form of pyoderma.
DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of solitary cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas includes numerous neoplastic and granulomatous disorders. Claw bed lesions are frequently misdiagnosed
as infectious paronychia. Cytologic examination is useful for establishing a presumptive
diagnosis (Fig. 20-20).108 Histologically, squamous cell carcinomas consist of irregular

FIGURE 20-20. Canine squamous cell carcinoma. Cytologic examination of aspirate shows
a cluster of atypical keratinoeytes. (Courtesy T. French.)

1256 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

masses or cords of keratinocytes that proliferate downward and invade the dermis (Fig.
20 - 21) .1, 2, 5. 6 Frequent findings include keratin formation, hom pearls, intercellular
bridges, mitoses, and atypia (Fig, 20-22A), Solar elastosis may occasionally be seen.v 14, lI8
The majority of squamous cell carcinomas in dogs and cats are of the well-differentiated,
histopathologic subtype, but poorly differentiated, acantholytic (pseudoglandular), spindle
cell, and clear cell varieties do occur.v 5 Rarely, squamous cell carcinomas arise from
chronic discoid lupus erythematosus lesions (Fig. 20-22B) or follicular cysts (Fig, 20-22C).
Squamous cell carcinomas are positive for cytokeratin, and such examinations may be
critical in establishing the true identity of spindle cell and clear cell varieties.F: 47, 49, 50, 58, 60
An abundant local inflammatory reaction, consisting mainly of CD3+ T lymphocytes,
CD79+ B lymphocytes, and IgG-bearing plasma cells, was associated with feline squamous cell carcinoma.P's Well-differentiated and mildly invasive neoplasms exhibited significantly greater numbers of these cells and expressed MHC II in higher proportion than
moderately differentiated and invasive neoplasms. This cellular and humoral response
could downregulate tumor growth, but does not induce complete tumor regression.
In one study," 80% of the canine digital squamous cell carcinomas had radiographic
evidence of bone lysis, and 13% had already metastasized.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Squamous cell carcinomas are generally locally invasive but are slow to metastasize.
Metastasis to regional lymph nodes and lungs is seen with advanced or poorly differentiated neoplasms. 130 Lesions of the claw bed appear to be more aggressive (about 70%
invade bony tissue of the third phalanx) and metastasize more frequently (up to 22% to
regional lymph node).4, 7, 124 In one study," 95% of the dogs with subungual squamous cell
carcinoma survived at least 1 year, whereas only 60% of the dogs with lesions elsewhere
on the digit survived for 1 year. In cats, the prognosis correlates with the degree of
histopathologic differentiation but not with the anatomic site. 102 Fifty percent of cats with
poorly differentiated neoplasms were destroyed within 12 weeks, and the longest survival
time was 20 weeks.
Clinical management of squamous cell carcinomas may include surgical excision,
cryosurgery, electrosurgery, hyperthermia, and radiotherapy.":" Amputation of the pinnae
(pinnectomy) or nasal planum (nosectomy) is effective and affordable, and most owners

FIGURE 20- 21. Canine squamous cell carcinoma. Irregular proliferation of keratinocytes
with dermal invasion.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1257

FIGURE 20-22. A, Canine squamous cell carcinoma. Note hom pearls, keratinocyte atypia, and desmoplasia. B,
Squamous cell carcinoma (left) arising from chronic discoid lupus erythematosus (right). C, Squamous cell carcinoma arising
from the base of a follicular cyst.

find it cosmetically acceptable." 119, 128-130, 142 Cryosurgery provides a I-year cure rate of
84% to 100% in tumors of the nose, the pinna, and the eyelid in cats." 103. 119, 128, 130 It is
best for lesions smaller than 0.5 em diameter. Radiotherapy (megavoltage) provided a 1year cure rate of 60% in nasal planum squamous cell carcinoma in cats." 104, 119, 1.39
Noninvasive brachytherapy (plesiotherapy) with Strontium 90 provided a I-year diseasefree interval for 89% of the cats treated for squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
planum." 141 Hyperthermia is often effective for the treatment of superficial cutaneous
squamous cell carcinomas in cats and dogs. 4, 7, 119, 128-130 Photodynamic therapy is successful in 63% of feline nasal and aural squamous cell carcinomas. 7, 126. 129 It is best used for
lesions smaller than 2 to 5 em diameter or with minimal invasion. The response of
advanced stage squamous cell carcinoma in cats to photodynamic therapy is poor but may
be improved with increased fluence (energy density).ll2 Median time to remission with
100 [oules/cm'' was 69 days, but with 200 [oules/cm'', it was 522 days. It is only applicable
to lesions smaller than 3 mm deep. Laser therapy may be useful, but too few reports are
available. 135
In general, chemotherapy with various agents-bleomycin, vincristine, hydroxyurea,
cisplatin (fatal pulmonary edema in the cat), 5-fluorouracil (neurotoxicity in the cat),
benzaldehyde, thioproline, oral retinoids - has been ineffective." Intralesional sustainedrelease chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil combined with bovine collagen and

'See references 4. 7, 106, 120, 121, 128, 130.

1258 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
epinephrine produced a complete response in 64% of cats with nasal planum lesions, and
no systemic toxicity was seen.'!" In cats with advanced-stage squamous cell carcinoma of
the nasal planum, intratumoral administration of carboplatin in purified sesame oil produced complete remission in 67% of the cases with no systemic toxicity.140 Recombinant
feline interferon showed dramatic in vitro antitumor effect against squamous cell carcinoma. 137
In all cases, avoidance of sunlight is an important part of prevention.s 128, 130 The
development of new squamous cell carcinomas is common when ultraviolet light is not
avoided.l'" It is important to remember that normal window glass does not totally block
ultraviolet rays.128. 130 Tattoos, magic markers, and sunscreens are not usually practical or
effective.P? In Australia, an anecdotal report indicated that "surfing gear" (full bodysuit
Factor 40 fabric) has been modified for, well tolerated by, and effective for preventing
truncal actinic dermatitis and squamous cell carcinomas in many Bull terriers, 105

Multicentric Squamous Cell Carcinoma In Situ
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) is uncommon (in cats) to
very rare (in dogs).2, 5, 100, 110, 123 Exposure to ultraviolet light and arsenic are not causal
factors.P' Papillomavirus antigen has been demonstrated in 45% of the feline skin lesions
by immunohistochemical methods.P Thus, these carcinoma in situ lesions probably represent a malignant transformation of the viral papillomas (see Papilloma). In one report, five
old cats had Derrwdex cati infestation only in the squamous cell carcinomas.'!' All of the
cats were feline leukemia virus (FeLV) negative, but three were FIV positive. The authors
hypothesized that (1) the papillomavirus infection and squamous cell carcinomas created a
local immunodeficiency state, allowing the demodicids to multiply excessively, or (2) the
FIV infection and its associated immunodeficiency state predisposed the cats to both the
papillomavirus infections and the D. cati proliferations.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
The condition is seen in older cats (10 years of age or older) and dogs. Lesions are
multifocal, and in cats, they occur most commonly over the head, neck, dorsal thorax,
abdomen, and proximal limbs. 100, 123 Most lesions have occurred in thickly haired and
darkly pigmented skin. They are initially characterized by well-circumscribed, melanotic,
hyperkeratotic macules and plaques, 0.5 to 3 em in diameter (see Fig. 20-18B). Some
lesions become almost verrucous. Cutaneous horns may develop on the surface of some
lesions.P? Later, the lesions become thick, crusted, ulcerated plaques that tend to bleed
easily. In dogs, the oral mucosa and the genitalia may be involved, and nodules may be
seen in addition to the lesions described earlier for cats. 2, 110

DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, well-circumscribed areas of irregular epidermal and superficial follicular hyperplasia and dysplasia are seen (Figs. 20-23A and B).2, 100, 123 Keratinocyte size and
appearance are highly variable, and mitotic figures are common in all cell layers. Orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyperkeratosis and hypermelanosis are common, and a lichenoid
inflammatory infiltrate may be seen. In one study,20 27% of the cats had focal areas of
invasive squamous cell carcinoma. Typical viral papilloma changes may be seen at the
margins of the squamous cell carcinoma, and papillomavirus antigen is most commonly
detected in these margins. 2o
In five cats, Derrwdex cati infestation was detected only in the squamous cell carcinomas (Fig. 20-24).1ll

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1259

FIGURE 20-23. Squamous cell
carcinoma in situ in a cat. A,
marked irregular hyperplasia, hyperpigmentation, and dysplasia of epidennis and hair follicle infundibula.
R, Close-up of A. Marked epidermal
dysplasia and several mitoses.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The mean course of disease, before animals are euthanized because of cosmetic concerns
and owner frustration, is more than 2 years. No metastases have been recorded, although
a footpad lesion invaded contiguous bone in one dog. lIO Lesions may wax and wane in size
or, in some instances, individual lesions may disappear. However, multiple lesions are
always present.
In dogs, the topical application of 5-fluorouracil caused regression of some Iesions.l'?
In cats, 90S r plesiotherapy (J3-irradiation) is effective in healing thin lesions (less than 2 to
4 mm in thicknessr.s" 123 However, new lesions continue to develop, and thicker plaques
do not respond. The oral administration of isotretinoin was ineffective in one cat,123 but
other reports indicate that etretinate (2 mglkg!day; no longer available) or acitretin (3 mg!
kg!day) may be effective. 20. 111 In many instances, in otherwise healthy, asymptomatic
animals, observation without therapy may be the most practical approach.

Basal Cell Tumors
The term basal cell tumor has been used in the veterinary literature to classify a large
group of common neoplasms of dogs and cats presumed to be derived from basal

1260 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-24. Numerous Derrwdex cati (arrow) in
a squamous cell carcinoma in situ.

epithelial cells of both epidermal and adnexal origin. Numerous histopathologic subclassifications have been applied to these neoplasms: medusa head, garland or ribbon, trabecular,
solid, cystic, adenoid, basosquamous, and granular cell. In general, these various histopathologic types are often found within the same neoplasm and offer no useful clinical,
prognostic, or therapeutic iniormation.F Most veterinary basal cell tumors are benign and
are not contiguous with the basal cell layer of the epidermis (medusa head, garland or
ribbon, trabecular, adenoid, and granular cell types); these lesions generally, show differentiation toward follicular structures and have been reclassified (see later).2. 5. 142. The
subclassifications solid basal cell tumor and basosquamous basal cell tumor are reported to
be biologically aggressive in some instances; most of these lesions are probably true basal
cell carcinomas.v 5 The term basal cell tumor, borrowed from human dermatopathology, is
now considered synonymous with basal cell carcinoma of low-grade malignancy. Some
authors prefer the terms basal cell epithelioma and basaloma, both of which indicate the
relatively good prognosis of the neoplasm.v "
In conclusion, the term basal cell tumor appears to have limited usage in veterinary
medicine and is retained for an uncommon, true basal cell neoplasm of cats that has no
obvious adnexal features." ,5
BENIGN FELINE BASAL CELL TUMOR
• Cause and Pathogenesis. .These tumors are uncommon benign neoplasms of the
cat that are thought to arise from the basal cells of the epidermis. The entire basal cell
tumor category accounted for 11% to 30% of all feline skin tumors in multiple surveys." It
"See references 8, 12-15, 26, 30, 35, 39, 95.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1261

is impossible to determine what proportion of these tumors represents benign feline basal
cell tumor.s- " The cause of basal cell tumors in cats is unknown. In humans, there is a
strong correlation between exposure to ultraviolet light and the development of basal cell
tumors.
• Clinical Findings. Basal cell tumors occur in adult cats with no sex predilection.
Himalayan, Siamese, and Persian cats may be predisposed. 1, 7 Usually, basal cell tumors
are solitary, but they may occasionally be multiple." The most common sites of occurrence are the head, the neck (see Fig. 20-18C), the limbs, and the dorsal trunk 1, 2, 5
Basal cell tumors are usually firm, rounded, elevated, and well circumscribed; they are
situated at the dermoepidermal junction and are usually 1 to 2 cm in diameter. They are
often melanotic (see Fig. 20-18D), may be cystic, and are frequently ulcerated and
alopecic.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, basal cell tumors are characterized by a well-circumscribed, symmetric proliferation of basaloid cells that has a fairly broad zone of
connection to the overlying epidermis (Fig. 20-25A and B).l, 2 The tumor often has a
lima bean-shaped silhouette, with the central indentation at the tumor surface. The
basaloid cells are arranged in tightly packed lobules and trabeculae. Basal cell tumors are
positive for cytokeratin.P
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of basal cell tumors may include
surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v ?

BASAL CELL CARCINOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Basal cell carcinomas are common (in cats) to uncommon (in dogs) low-grade malignancies arising from small, pluripotential epithelial cells
within the basal cell layers of the epidermis and adnexa.s " Numerical incidence data are
difficult to provide, because these neoplasms have been traditionally included in the broad
category of basal cell tumor (see earlier). The cause of basal cell carcinomas in dogs and
cats is unknown. In humans, there is a strong correlation between ultraviolet light exposure and the development of basal cell carcinomas. Despite high mitotic activity, basal cell
tumors have a slow growth. A recent study suggested that this may be due to an increased
duration of the entire cell cycle and increased apoptosis.v?

FIGURE 20-25. A, Feline basal cell tumor. Proliferation of
basaloid cells and melanocytes. B, Feline basal cell tumor. Cytologic examination of aspirate shows typical clusters of monomorphic basaloid cells.

1262 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

• Clinical Findings. Basal cell carcinomas occur in dogs and cats at an average age
of 7 to 10 years and with no sex predilection." Siamese cats, Cocker spaniels, Kerry blue
terriers, Shetland sheepdogs, Siberian huskies, English Springer spaniels, and Poodles
appear to be predisposed. t The tumors occur most commonly on the head, the neck, and
the thorax. In cats, lesions occasionally occur on the nasal planum or the eyelids. Basal
cell carcinomas are usually solitary, well circumscribed, firm to cystic, rounded, 0.5 to 10
em in diameter, and commonly alopecic and ulcerated. Basal cell carcinomas are frequently melanotic (Fig. 20-26).
• Diagnosis. Three major histopathologic variants of basal cell carcinoma occur in
dogs and cats: solid, keratinizing (basosquamous), and clear cell.': 2 Solid basal cell carcinoma is the most common subtype in cats and is characterized by circumscribed, irregular
dermal masses comprising multiple basaloid cell aggregates embedded in a moderate
stroma (desmoplasia). Mitotic activity is low to high, and atypical mitotic figures are
common. Variable secondary features include cyst formation (necrosis), melanization, adnexal differentiation, mucinosis, artifactual cleft formation between stroma and neoplastic
cells, and cartilaginous metaplasia.s'"
Keratinizing basal cell carcinoma (basosquamous carcinoma) is the most common type
in dogs and is characterized by an irregular dermal mass of basaloid cells having a
plaquelike configuration, multifocal epidermal contiguity, and multiple areas of abrupt
squamous differentiation and keratinization."
Clear cell basal cell carcinoma is rare and is more commonly encountered in cats."
The overall architecture is identical to that of solid basal cell carcinoma, but the epithelial
cells are large and polygonal and have water-clear or finely granular cytoplasm. Basal cell
carcinomas are positive for cytokeratin.f" 49. 50. 60. 61 Papillomavirus antigen was not detected in feline basal cell carcinomas. so
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of basal cell carcinomas may include
surgical excision, electrosurgery, cryosurgery, and observation without therapy.v" The

"See references 1, 2, 5-7, 12, 30, 35, 95.
[See references 1, 5-7, 12, 14, 95, 99.

FIGURE 20-26. Melanotic
basal cell tumor on muzzle of a
dog.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1263

FIGURE 20-27. Trichoepithelioma on the
paw of a cat.

incidence of recurrence and metastasis is very low.94 In humans, intralesional injections of
interferon have been used to treat basal cell carcinoma.

Hair Follicle Tumors
Previous surveys of hair follicle neoplasms in dogs and cats indicated that these neoplasms
account for about 5% and 1%, respectively, of all skin neoplasms seen in these species. 0
The most common subtypes were trichoepithelioma and pilomatnxoma.r'? With the reclassification of so-called basal cell tumors (see earlier), it appears that the majority of
previous reports of these neoplasms were examples of trichoblastoma.s 5, 142<1 Thus, neoplasms of hair follicle origin are much more common than previous veterinary literature
suggested. Hair follicle tumors are positive for cytokeratin.t" 54,61

TRICHOEPITHELIOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichoepitheliomas are uncommon benign neoplasms of
dogs and cats that are thought to arise from keratinocytes that differentiate toward all
three segments of the hair follicle. I, 2, 5, 33, 149 The cause of trichoepitheliomas in dogs and
cats is unknown. In humans, a syndrome of multiple trichoepitheliomas is hereditary.
Usually, trichoepitheliomas occur in dogs and cats older than 5 years of age. No sex
predilection appears to exist in either species. In cats, there is a predilection for Persians,
and the neoplasms occur most commonly on the head, the limbs (Fig. 20-27), and the
tail.': 142<1, 150 In dogs, there may be a predilection for the dorsal lumbar (see Fig. 20-18E)
and lateral thoracic and limb areas, and Golden retrievers, Basset hounds, German shepherd dogs, Cocker spaniels, Irish setters, English Springer spaniels, miniature Schnauzers,
and Standard Poodles may be predisposed. I, 142<1, 149
Although these neoplasms are usually solitary, they may occasionally be multiple. They
are solid or cystic, rounded, elevated, well circumscribed, and dermoepidermal in position,
"See references 12, 14, 26, 27, 33, 149, 150,

1264 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-28. Canine trichoepithelioma. Disorganized proliferation of hair follicle-like
structures and hairs.

ranging from 0.5 to 15 em in diameter. Frequently, they become ulcerated and alopecic.
Trichoepitheliomas are rarely invasive or metastatic."
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, trichoepitheliomas vary considerably, depending on
the degree of differentiation and whether the tumor is primarily related to the follicular
sheath or the hair matrix (Fig. 20-28).1· 33.149 Frequent characteristics include hom cysts,
lack of intercellular bridges (desmosomes), differentiation toward hair follicle-like structures, formation of abortive or rudimentary hairs, desmoplasia, inflammation, melanization,
and shadow (ghost) cells.149 Dystrophic mineralization or malignant transformation may be
seen in up to 18% of the cases. 149 A variant showing marked mucinosis is most common
in Golden retrievers.U?
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of trichoepitheliomas may include
surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v" Recurrence and metastasis are rare, in spite of histopathologic evidence of malignancy. 1. 7. 149

TRICHOLEMMOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Tricholemmomas are rare benign neoplasms of dogs
and cats that arise from keratinocytes of the outer root sheath of hair follicles.1. 2. 142a. 143.
149. 150 The cause of tricholemmomas is unknown. In humans, a syndrome of multiple
tricholemmomas is hereditary.
• Clinical Findings. In dogs, tricholemmomas occur at 5 to 13 years of age. There
appears to be no sex predilection, but Afghan hounds may be predisposed. These neoplasms occur most commonly on the head and neck and are usually firm, ovoid, and 1 to
7 cm in diameter.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, tricholemmomas are characterized by a nodular
proliferation of keratinocytes, many of which are clear and have a positive reaction with
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain owing to their glycogen content (Fig. 20_29).1.2.149 The
tumor lobules are surrounded by a distinct, often thickened basement membrane zone.
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of tricholemmomas may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v"

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1265

FIGURE 20-29. Canine tricholemmoma. Proliferation of predominantly clear, outer root
sheath-like keratinocytes. Individual nodules are often surrounded by a distinct, thick basement membrane zone.

TRICHOFOLLICULOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichofolliculomas are rare benign neoplasms of dogs
that are highly structured hamartomas of the pilosebaceous unit.v 5. 149 The cause of
trichofolliculomas is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Trichofolliculomas occur in adult dogs, with no apparent age,
breed, sex, or site predilections. The lesions are solitary, dome-shaped, firm papules or
nodules, often containing a central depression or pore that may exude keratosebaceous
material or contain a tuft of hairs.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, trichofolliculomas are characterized by a central
large dilated or cystic follicle with smaller follicles or follicle-like structures that radiate
outward from the central follicle into the surrounding connective tissue in an arborizing
pattern (Fig. 20_30).5.149
• Clinical Management. Clinical management may include surgical excision and
observation without treatment.f 149
DILATED PORE OF WINER
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Dilated pore of Winer is an uncommon benign follicular tumor of cats.v 142a. 146. 148 The cause of this lesion is unknown, although most evidence
favors a developmental origin arising from the combined forces of obstruction and intrafollicular pressure leading to hair follicle hyperplasia.
• Clinical Findings. Dilated pore is seen in older cats, with no apparent breed or
sex predilection. The lesions are solitary and occur most frequently on the neck, head, and
trunk (see Fig. 20-18F).1 42a. 146. 148 They are characterized by a well-demarcated, smooth,
dermoepidermal cyst-like structure with a central, keratin-filled wide-mouthed pore.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, this disorder is characterized by a markedly dilated,
keratinized, pilar infundibulum lined by an epithelium that is atrophic near the ostium but
increasingly hyperplastic toward the base of the lesion (Fig. 20_31).146.148 The epithelium

1266 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-30. Canine trichofolliculoma.
Central large hair follicle with numerous smaller
abortive hair follicles radiating into the surrounding dermis.

FIGURE 20-31. Feline dilated pore of Winer. Widely dilated, keratin-filled hair follicle.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1267
at the base shows psoriasiform hyperplasia with rete ridges and irregular, thin projections
into the surrounding dermis (Fig. 20-32).
• Clinical Management. Clinical management includes surgical excision and observation without treatment.s 148

WARTY DYSKERATOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Warty dyskeratoma is a rare, benign, epithelial proliferation of dogs.5, 145 Although warty dyskeratoma is believed by many investigators to arise
from pilosebaceous structures, its occurrence in the oral cavity of humans has challenged
traditional interpretations."
• Clinical Findings. Warty dyskeratoma occurs in dogs, but too few cases have been
recognized to infer age, breed, sex, or site predilections, The lesions are solitary, wartlike
papules or nodules with a hyperkeratotic umbilicated center.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, warty dyskeratoma is characterized by a cup-shaped
invagination connected with the surface by a keratin-filled channel (Fig. 20_33).5,145 The
large invagination contains numerous acantholytic, dyskeratotic cells (Fig. 20-34). The
lower portion of the invagination is occupied by numerous villi (elongated dermal papillae
lined with a single layer of basal cells) (Fig. 20-35). Typical corps rounds (dyskeratotic
acanthocytes with a pyknotic nucleus surrounded by a clear halo) can usually be found.
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of warty dyskeratoma may include
surgical excision and observation without treatment'
PILOMATRIXOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Pilomatrixomas (pilomatricornas, or calcifying epitheliomas [of Malherbe]) are uncommon (in dogs) to rare (in cats) neoplasms and are thought
to arise from the hair matrix. 1, 2, 142a, 149, 150 The cause of pilomatrixomas is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Pilomatrixomas usually occur in dogs and cats older than 5
years of age. 1, 2. 149, 150 There is no apparent sex predilection. Kerry blue terriers, Poodles,
and Old English sheepdogs appear to be predisposed. Usually, pilomatrixomas are solitary.

FIGURE 20-32. Close-up of Figure 20-31. The base of the lesion shows characteristic
psoriasiform epithelial hyperplasia.

1268 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-33. Canine warty dyskeratoma. The base of a keratin-filled mass shows multiple villi.

There may be site predilection to neck, shoulders, lateral thorax, and back. Pilomatrixomas
are solid to cystic, rounded, elevated, well circumscribed, and dermal to subcutaneous in
position, and they range from 1 to 10 em in diameter. They frequently become ulcerated
and alopecic. Pilomatrixomas are rarely invasive or metastatic (matrical carcinoma) to
lymph nodes, lungs, nervous system, and bone. 1. 2. 5. 147. 149
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, pilomatrixomas are characterized by a well-circumscribed, cystic, multilobulated, deep dermal to subcutaneous proliferation of basophilic

FIGURE 20-34. Close-up of Figure 20-33. Basal villi with a single layer of attached
keratinocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1269

FIGURE 20-35. Close-up of Figure 20-33. Acantholytic cells and typical COlPS rounds
(arrow).

cells (which resemble hair matrix cells) and shadow, or ghost, cells (fully keratinized,
faintly eosinophilic cells with a central, unstained nucleus) (Fig. 20-36).:3:3· 149 Shadow cells
are not pathognomonic, having been found in other hair follicle neoplasms, various keratinizing cysts, inflamed hair follicles, and chronic hyperkeratotic dermatoses.s 149 There is
abrupt keratinization (no stratum granulosum), and the keratin is homogeneous, relatively
amorphous, and nonfibrillar (tricholemmal keratin). A constant feature of pilomatrixomas
is the occurrence of multiple dermal papilla-like structures within the basaloid cellular
component (Fig. 20_37).149 Other frequent but not constant features of pilomatrixomas
are calcification within the areas of shadow cells, desmoplasia, and inflammation.v"
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of pilomatrixomas may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, and observation without treatrnent.v": 149. 1.50

FIGURE 20-36. Canine pilomatrixoma. Multilocular mass consisting of deeply basophilic epithelial wall and brightly eosinophilic
homogeneous central keratin.

1270 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-37. Close-up of
Figure 20-36. Multiple dermal papilla-like structures within the basaloid wall of a neoplasm.

TRICHOBLASTOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Trichoblastomas are common, usually benign neoplasms
in dogs and cats, which are presumably derived from trichoblastic (primitive hair germ)
epithelium.v 5, 142. The incidence of these tumors in dogs is probably close to that
previously reported under the term basal cell tumor (see earlieri.v 5,142. The incidence in
cats is more difficult to estimate because cats have several types of neoplasms that are
composed of small basaloid epithelial cells (to include benign feline basal cell tumor,
ductular epitrichial sweat gland neoplasms, and primitive hair follicle neoplasmsj.v 5 The
cause of trichoblastomas is unknown,
• Clinical Findings. Trichoblastomas occur in dogs and cats older than 5 years of
age ,2, .5, 142. No sex predilection is evident, but Poodles and Cocker spaniels may be
overrepresented. Lesions are usually solitary, dome shaped, firm, 1 to 2 em in diameter,
and often alopecic, ulcerated, and melanotic, In dogs, lesions occur most commonly on
the head and the neck, especially the base of the ear. In cats, lesions occur most
commonly on the cranial half of the trunk. Metastasis is extremely rare,144
• Diagnosis. Trichoblastomas occur in three basic histopathologic subtypes: ribbon
(garland, or medusa head), trabecular, and granular cell,2, 5 The ribbon type is most
common in dogs and is characterized by basaloid cells arranged in branching, winding,
and radiating columns with no epidermal contiguity (Fig, 20-38),2,5 The trabecular type is
most common in cats and is characterized by lobules and broad trabeculae of basaloid
cells with prominent peripheral palisading and no epidermal contiguity.v 5 The granular
cell type is rare and is architecturally identical to the ribbon type of trichoblastoma, but
many of the epithelial aggregates are composed entirely of larger cells with granular or
vacuolated cytoplasm." 5, 98
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of trichoblastomas may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, and observation without treatment.v ?

Sebaceous Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Sebaceous gland tumors are common (in dogs) to uncommon (in cats) epithelial growths
arising from sebocytes, I, 2,14,151-155 Their cause is unknown.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1271

FIGURE 20-38. Canine trichoblastoma. Ribbon or medusoid type.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Sebaceous gland tumors are common in dogs, accounting for 6% to 21% of all canine skin
tumors in multiple surveys.P! 152 Affected dogs average 9 to 10 years of age, and there is
no sex predilection. Nodular sebaceous hyperplasias account for about 53% of the lesions
and occur most commonly in Beagles, Cocker spaniels, Poodles, Dachshunds, and miniature Schnauzers. 1, 152 The lesions are usually solitary (about 70% of cases), well circumscribed, raised, smooth and greasy to hyperkeratotic, wartlike or cauliflower-like in appearance, pinkish to orangish, 3 mm to 7 em in diameter, and frequently melanotic or
ulcerated (see Fig. 20-18G).152 They occur most commonly on the limbs, the trunk, and
the eyelids.
Sebaceous epitheliomas (basal cell carcinoma with sebaceous differentiation) account
for about 37% of sebaceous gland tumors and occur most commonly in Shih tzus, Lhasa
apsos, Malamutes, Siberian huskies, and Irish setters.F' The lesions are usually solitary
(about 67% of cases), well circumscribed, raised, smooth, and greasy to hyperkeratotic,
wartlike or cauliflower-like in appearance, pinkish to orangish, 5 mm to 5 ern in diameter,
and frequently ulcerated or melanotic.l'" They occur most commonly on the eyelids and
the head (see Fig. 20-18H).
Sebaceous adenomas account for about 8% of sebaceous gland tumors and occur most
commonly on the eyelids and the limbs (Fig. 20-39A),152 The appearance of the lesions is
as described for sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous epithelioma (see earlier).
Sebaceous carcinoma accounts for only about 2% of the tumors.P'' Lesions are solitary, nodular, 2.5 to 7.5 em in diameter, and frequently ulcerated (Fig. 20-39B). The
head and the limbs are most commonly affected. 1 Cocker spaniels may be predisposed. 1
Cat

Sebaceous gland tumors are uncommon in cats, accounting for about 3% of all feline skin
tumors. 1, 14, 153 Affected cats are usually 10 years of age or older; there is no apparent sex
predilection. Persians may be predisposed.' Lesions are usually solitary and occur most
commonly on the head, the neck, and the trunk. They are well circumscribed, raised,

1272 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-39. A, Sebaceous adenoma on the medial limb of a dog. B, Sebaceous carcinoma on the limb
of a dog. C, Sebaceous gland hyperplasia on the thorax of a cat. Note striking resemblance to feline mast cell
tumor in Figure 20-100C. D, Epitrichial sweat gland adenoma over the thorax of a dog. E, Epitrichial sweat
gland carcinoma over the lateral neck and shoulder of a dog. F, Atrichial sweat gland adenoma on the footpad
of a dog. G, Circumanal gland adenoma in the perianal region of a dog. H, Circumanal gland carcinoma in a
dog.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1273

smooth and greasy to hyperkeratotic, wartlike to cauliflower-like in appearance, pinkish to
orangish, and 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter. Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia accounts for about
67% of all feline sebaceous gland tumors (Fig. 20-39C).14. 153
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination reveals clustering of lipidized sebocytes (Fig. 20-40B). Histopathologically, sebaceous gland tumors are classified as nodular sebaceous hyperplasia (greatly
enlarged sebaceous glands composed of numerous lobules grouped symmetrically around
centrally located sebaceous ducts) (Fig. 20-40A); sebaceous adenoma (lobules of sebaceous cells of irregular shape and size, which are asymmetrically arranged and well

FIGURE 20-40. A, Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia in a dog. B, Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia in a dog. Cytologic examination of aspirate shows the typical clustering of highly
liptdized sebocytes.

1274 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-41. Canine sebaceous epithelioma. Proliferation of basaloid cells with frequent sebaceous differentiation.

demarcated from the surrounding tissue and contain mostly mature sebocytes and fewer
undifferentiated germinative cells); sebaceous epithelioma (tumor similar to basal cell
tumor but containing mostly undifferentiated germinative cells and fewer mature sebocytes) (Fig. 20-41); and sebaceous carcinoma (tumor with pleomorphism and atypia) (Fig.
20-42).2. 33. 152. 153 In one study, about 81% of sebaceous epitheliomas and 54% of
sebaceous adenomas in dogs had areas of sebaceous hyperplasia peripheral to and often
phasing into epitheliomatous or adenomatous areas, suggesting that sebaceous hyperplasia

FIGURE 20-42. Canine sebaceous carcinoma. Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical sebocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1275
may be a precursor to the other lesions.P'' Sebaceous gland tumors are positive for
cytokeratin. 47. 49

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of sebaceous gland tumors may include surgical excision, cryotherapy, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v" Sebaceous gland neoplasms
rarely recur after surgery, and sebaceous carcinomas rarely metastasize. 1,52. 153 Oral retinoids have been an effective treatment of sebaceous hyperplasia in humans and a small
number of dogs (see Chap. 3).88.89 Neither in dogs nor in cats were any clinical variables
found to be useful predictors of the histopathologic type of sebaceous gland abnormality.152. 153

Sweat Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland tumors are uncommon growths in the dog and cat
arising from the glandular or ductular components of epitrichial sweat glands. 1. 2. 14. 27. 33. 158
Atrichial (eccrine) sweat gland tumors are rare in dogs and cats.v 14. 27. 33 The cause of
sweat gland tumors is unknown. Cytogenetic analysis of two feline epitrichial sweat gland
neoplasms revealed a loss of chromosome E3 or B2 and E3 in both. 160

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Epitrichial sweat gland tumors may be benign or malignant in the dog. 1. 158 However, no
clinical features are consistently helpful in distinguishing histologically benign from histologically malignant tumors.P" These neoplasms generally occur in dogs that are 10 years of
age or older, with no apparent sex predilection. Golden retrievers, Cocker spaniels, and
German shepherd dogs may be predisposed. 1. 5. 158 Epitrichial sweat gland neoplasms are
usually solitary (about 93% of cases), well circumscribed, firm, raised, 0.5 to 10 cm in
diameter, and frequently ulcerated. Some tumors may be cystic and have a bluish or
purplish tint when viewed through the overlying skin (see Fig. 20-39D). Lesions occur
most commonly on the neck, the head, the dorsal trunk, and the limbs. 1, 2. 27, 33. 158 Some
epitrichial sweat gland carcinomas are poorly circumscribed, infiltrative, plaquelike, or
ulcerative growths (see Fig. 20-39E), especially in the ventral abdomen, proximal limb, or
neck area, which may be misdiagnosed as pyotraumatic dermatitis or staphylococcal dermatitis.
Atrichial sweat gland tumors may be benign or malignant and are extremely rare. 2,5.
27, 159 The lesions are solitary, firm, well to poorly circumscribed, frequently ulcerated, and
1 to 3 em in diameter; they occur on the footpads (see Fig. 20-39F). Atrichial sweat
gland carcinomas may present as a poorly defined swelling of the footpad and the digit.
Cat

Epitrichial sweat gland tumors may be benign or malignant in cats. 1. 158 However, no
clinical features are consistently helpful in distinguishing histologically benign from histologically malignant neoplasms.l'" These neoplasms generally occur in cats that are 10 years
of age or older, with no apparent breed or sex predilection. Epitrichial sweat gland
carcinomas may be more frequent in the Siamese. 1 Epitrichial sweat gland tumors are
usually solitary (about 100% of cases), well circumscribed, firm, raised, 0.3 to 3 em in
diameter, and frequently ulcerated. Some lesions may be cystic and have a bluish or
purplish tint when viewed through the overlying skin. Lesions occur most commonly on
the head (especially the cheek), the pinna, the neck, the axilla, the limb (Fig. 20-43), and
the tail.l- 5, 14, 27, 30, 158 Dry gangrene and sloughing of the claws and distal phalanges on all
paws was reported in a cat with metastatic epitrichial sweat gland carcinoma.l'"

1276 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-43. Epitrichial sweat gland
carcinoma on the digit of a cat.

Atrichial sweat gland tumors are almost always malignant in cats and are extremely
rare.v 14 Atrichial sweat gland carcinomas usually present as poorly defined swellings of the

footpad and the digit and may affect multiple digits in cats. Ulceration is common.

DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic examination reveals clusters of epithelial cells containing secretory droplets (Fig.
20-44). The literature on histopathologic classification of sweat gland neoplasms is confusing and includes numerous subtypes: cystadenoma, glandular adenoma, ductular adenoma,
syringoadenoma, spiradenoma, cylindroma, hidradenoma papilliferum, and carcinoma (solitary, papillary, tubular, glandular, ductular, mixed, clear cell, signet ring) (Figs. 20-45 to
20-48).~

The clinical significance of these various histologic types is unknown. In one

"See references 1-3, 5, 6, 156-158.

FIGURE 20-44. Epitrichial sweat
gland adenoma in a dog. Cytologic
examination of aspirate reveals clustered epitrichial sweat gland cells
containing secretion material (sweat).

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1277

FIGURE 20-45. Feline papillary cystadenoma. Papillary processes, lined with a single row
of cuboidal to epitrichial sweat gland cells, projecting into a cyst cavity containing amorphous
secretory material.

retrospective study, most epitrichial sweat gland neoplasms in dogs (91 per cent) and cats
(80 per cent) were histologically malignant.l'" Most carcinomas were the solid type, and
there was no apparent relationship between the histopathologic subtype and clinical variables. In dogs, about 22 per cent of carcinomas showed lymphatic invasion (see Fig. 2048), and cartilaginous or osseous metaplasia was rarely seen. Epitrichial sweat gland
neoplasms (Fig. 20-49) are positive for cytokeratin.f" 49, 52 Carcinomas, but not adenomas,
were positive for carcinoembryonic antigen (in secretory cells) and vimentin (in myoepithelial cells).52

FIGURE 20-46. Canine papillary syringadenoma.

1278 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-47. Close-up of Figure 20-46.

FIGURE 20-48. Canine epitrichial sweat gland carcinoma. Proliferation of atypical epitrichial sweat gland
cells in cords and glandular structures, with lymphatic
invasion (right).

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1279

FIGURE 20-49. Canine atrichia! sweat gland adenoma.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of sweat gland tumors may include surgical excision, cryosurgery,
electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v" Although epitrichial sweat gland
carcinomas are occasionally reported to be highly invasive and rapidly metastatic to lymph
nodes, lungs, and bones," 27, 33, 35, 158, 162 no instances of metastasis were documented in
one retrospective study.l'" even though about 22% of cases had histologically evident
lymphatic invasion. Atrichial sweat gland carcinomas are aggressive and exhibit rapid
metastasis to regional lymph nodes and subcutaneous tissues of the affected limb." 5

Perianal Gland Tumors
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Perianal gland tumors, which are common in the dog, arise most frequently from circumanal glands (perianal or hepatoid glands and modified sebaceous glands) and less
commonly from anal sac glands (apocrine glands of the anal sacs)." The cause of perianal
gland tumors is unknown. However, the circumanal glands and their tumors are known to
be modulated by sex hormones and contain both androgen and estrogen receptors.t'"

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Circumanal gland tumors occur in dogs at an average age of 11 years. Adenomas are
about nine times more frequent in male than in female dogs. Carcinomas occur with
equal frequency in male and female dogs. Cocker spaniels, English bulldogs, Samoyeds,
Afghans, Dachshunds, German shepherd dogs, Beagles, Siberian huskies, Shih tzus, and
Lhasa apsos are predisposed to the development of circumanal gland tumors. Apocrine
neoplasms of anal sac origin are most common in old female dogs and are often associated with pseudohyperparathyroidism.'- 4-7,163 Circumanal gland neoplasms may be solitary
or multiple. Most occur adjacent to the anus, but they may occur on the tail, perineum,
prepuce, thigh, and dorsal lumbosacral area, The smaller (less than 1 em in diameter)
neoplasms are spherical or ovoid and tend to become multinodular and ulcerated as they

"See references 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 10, 27, 33, 163, 164.

1280 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-50. Diffuse circumanal
gland hyperplasia around the anus of a
dog.

become larger (up to 10 ern in diameter). Perianal neoplasms are usually firm, dermoepidermal in location, and well circumscribed to poorly circumscribed.
Nodular circumanal gland hyperplasia may occur as multiple discrete nodules of
varying size that are impossible to distinguish from circumanal gland adenomas (see Fig.
20-39G) or as a diffuse bulging ring around the anus (Fig. 20-50). Most circumanal
gland tumors are benign.
Circumanal gland carcinomas (see Fig. 20-39H) tend to grow more rapidly, attain a
larger size, and ulcerate more extensively than do adenomas. Dogs with lesions larger than
5 em in diameter have an ll-fold higher risk of dying of tumor-related causes.P' Metastasis, especially to the sacral and sublumbar lymph nodes, occurs in up to 30% of cases. 1
Apocrine tumors of anal sac origin are usually adenocarcinomas, present as a perineal
mass (ventrolateral to the anus), and often produce pseudohyperparathyroidism. The
tumors usually metastasize, especially to the sacral and sublumbar lymph nodes. 1, 163
DIAGNOSIS
Histologically, perianal gland tumors are classified into two basic types: (1) circumanal
gland tumors (hyperplasia [Fig. 20-51], adenoma, and carcinoma) and (2) apocrine tumors of anal sac origin." Perianal gland neoplasms are positive for cytokeratin.v- 166
Myoepithelial cells stained for neuron-specific enolase and synaptophysin.l'"
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of circumanal gland tumors may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, radiotherapy, castration, and the administration of estrogens.":" Cas-

·See references 1, 2, 5, 7, 33, 163, 164.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1281

FIGURE 20-51. Canine circumanal gland hyperplasia.

tration is usually the treatment of choice for circumanal gland hyperplasias and adenomas,
with 95% of dogs responding well. Concurrent surgical excision is usually needed only
with ulcerated or recurrent neoplasms in male dogs but is usually mandatory for circumanal gland neoplasms in female dogs. Castration is not effective for carcinomas. Estrogen
therapy is not usually recommended, because any tumor regressions induced are transient.
Recurrence of circumanal hyperplasia or adenoma after surgical resection and castration,
or occurrence of these lesions in female dogs, suggests that these animals should be
evaluated for hyperadrenocorticism (elevated androgen levels, see Chap. 10).5.7 Apocrine
neoplasms of anal sac origin have a poor prognosis, because local recurrence and metastasis are common.l'v

Salivary Gland Tumors
Salivary gland neoplasms are rare in dogs and cats.l'" There are no apparent breed or sex
predilections, and neoplasms generally occur in animals 10 years of age or older. Typical
presentations include an ulcerated mass near the lateral commissure of the mouth and a
subcutaneous mass caudoventral to the angle of the mandible or below the ear. The
majority (85%) of the neoplasms are malignant. Recurrence after surgery and metastasis
are common.

• MESENCHYMAL NEOPLASMS
The classification of some mesenchymal neoplasms, especially the sarcomas, is controversial. Many authors lump fibrosarcomas, hemangiopericytomas, myxosarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas, liposarcomas, malignant fibrous histiocytomas, undifferentiated sarcomas,
and schwannomas into a "grab-bag" category called soft tissue sarcoma.7. 23. 40, 182, 183 The
histologic distinction between some of these neoplasms is often subtle, and there is
inconsistency in the use of nomenclature for them. These neoplasms have similar clinical
presentations and biological behaviors. A recent immunocytochemical study on canine
cutaneous fibrosarcomas, hemangiopericytomas, and schwannomas suggested that these
terms carry little precision in respect to tumor cell differentiation. 54 The authors of this
study suggested that these three "tumors" merely reflect varieties of proliferative patterns
that may be manifested by cells of varying lineage, and that they would support the use of
the term spindle cell tumor of canine soft tissue to encompass this group of lesions.

1282 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

Sarcomas are frequently characterized by a pseudocapsule of compressed neoplastic
cells and stroma.t- 40 Thus, simple lumpectomy is not likely to be curative and should
always be followed with radiotherapy with or without hyperthermia. If surgery is to be
successful, it must be aggressive (e.g., compartmental resection or amputation)."
Reports of the use of radiotherapy on animal sarcomas before the routine use of
megavoltage radiation and the appreciation that more aggressive time-dose schemes would
be necessary suggested that soft tissue sarcomas were relatively radioresistant (e.g., orthovoltage radiation resulted in I-year local cure rates of only 17%173). With the use of
megavoltage radiation (doses of 45 to 50 Cy), I-year control rates of 48% to 67% have
been achieved. 182, 183 However, the probability of long-term control of many soft-tissue
sarcomas with radiation therapy remains low." 40

Tumors of Fibroblast Origin
FIBROMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Fibromas are uncommon benign neoplasms of the dog
and cat arising from dermal or subcutaneous fibroblasts.v 4-7, 33 The cause of fibromas is
unknown. In one canine fibroma, cytogenetic evaluation demonstrated trisomy 1.2 10
• Clinical Findings. These neoplasms usually occur in older dogs and cats. There is
no breed or sex predilection in cats. In dogs, however, fibromas are reported to occur
most commonly in Boxers, Boston terriers, Doberman pinschers, Golden retrievers, and
Fox terriers. 1, 4-7,12,16 Female animals are predisposed. Usually, these lesions are solitary
(Fig. 20-52A) and may be more common on the limbs, flanks, and groin, They are
usually well circumscribed, firm (fibroma durum) to soft (fibroma molle), dome shaped to
pedunculated, dermoepidermal to subcutaneous in location, and 1 to 5 em in diameter. In
dogs, fibromas may be melanotic (see Fig. 20-52B), have a pin-feathered appearance, or
both. In France, an unusual fibroma has been reported on the bridge of the nose in
dogs.55 Although it is histologically benign, the neoplasm is locally aggressive, grows to a
large size, and may invade the orbital cavity. Fibromas are usually noninvasive and are
nonmetastatic.
• Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals small numbers of spindle-shaped fibroblasts (Fig. 20-53B). Histologically, fibromas are characterized by whorls and interlacing
bundles of fibroblasts and collagen fibers (Fig. 20-53A).2. .33 The neoplastic cells are
usually fusiform, and mitoses are rare. Fibromas containing focal areas of mucinous or

FIGURE 20-52. A, Fibroma, cat. B, Melanotic digital fibroma in a dog. Note resemblance
to digital melanoma in Figure 20-147.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1283

FIGURE 20-53. A, Canine fibroma. Interlacing proliferation of well-differentiated fibroblasts and collagen fibers. B,
Canine fibroma. Cytologic examination of aspirate reveals small numbers of monomorphic fibroblasts. C, Perifollicular
fibroma from a dog.

myxomatous degeneration are often called fibromyxomas. Some fibromas are distinctly
perifollicular (Fig. 20-53C). Fibromas are positive for vimentin.??
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of fibromas may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v"

DERMATOFIBROMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Dermatofibromas are rare fibrocytic tumors in dogs and
cats." The cause is unknown, and there is controversy about whether the lesion is neoplastic or reactive.
• Clinical Findings. Dermatofibromas appear as solitary, well-circumscribed, firm
nodules that are usually less than 2 em in diameter. The overlying epidermis is alopecic
and thickened. Lesions occur most often on the head, and affected animals are usually
younger than 5 years old.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, dermatofibromas are characterized by spindle and
stellate fibrocytic cells arranged in haphazard bundles and small whorls, interspersed with
a moderate stroma composed of collagen fibers and bundles of varying thickness.f
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of dermatofibromas may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, and observation without treatment.

1284 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIBROVASCULAR PAPILLOMA
A fibrovascular papilloma (skin tag, keratin tag, skin polyp, acrochordon, fibroepithelial
polyp, or soft fibroma) is an uncommon benign tumor of fibrovascular origin in dogs. I, 2, 5
The cause of these growths is unknown, but they may be a proliferative response to
trauma or focal furunculosis.
• Clinical Findings. No sex predilection is established, but large and giant breeds
appear to be predisposed, especially the Doberman pinscher and Labrador retriever.' The
lesions may be solitary or multiple, filiform to pedunculated, smooth or hyperkeratotic,
soft, and 2 to 5 mm in diameter by 1 to 2 em in length (Fig, 20-54). Fibrovascular
papillomas occur most commonly on bony prominences, the trunk, and the sternum.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, fibrovascular papillomas are characterized by a fibrovascular core exhibiting papillomatosis and irregular hyperplasia of the overlying epidermis (Fig. 20-55).2,5
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of fibrovascular papillomas may include surgical excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment. 5

FIBROPRURITIC NODULE
• Cause and Pathogenesis. The etiopathogenesis of fibropruritic nodules is unknown. However, they have been described only in conjunction with the chronic selftrauma of canine flea bite hypersensitivity (see Chap. 8).2,5
• Clinical Findings. Fibropruritic nodules are most commonly seen in dogs older
than 8 years of age and may be more common in German shepherd dogs and their
crosses.v 5 Solitary to multiple firm, sessile or pedunculated, alopecic nodules develop,
which vary in size from 1 to 2 em in diameter (Fig. 20-56A). Lesions may be erythematous or hyperpigmented, or smooth or hyperkeratotic, and are occasionally ulcerated.
Fibropruritic nodules are located predominantly over the dorsal lumbosacral area of dogs
with chronic flea bite hypersensitivity.
• Diagnosis. The clinical presentation is characteristic. Histopathologically, fibropruritic nodules are characterized by nodular dermal fibrosis, inflammation, and often,
marked papillated epidermal hyperplasia (Fig. 20-57).2,5 Eosinophils are usually a prominent inflammatory cell.

FIGURE 20-54. Multiple fibrovascular papillomas on the sternum of a dog.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1285

FIGURE 20-55. Canine fibrovascular papilloma. Papillomatous proliferation of epidermis
and fibrovascular core.

• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision and controlling
the associated flea bite hypersensitivity.

FELINE "SARCOID"
• Cause and Pathogenesis. The cause of this rare neoplasm is unknown. Because
of its histologic resemblance to the equine sarcoid, immunohistochemical tests for bovine
papillomavirus were performed but were negative. 20 In addition, immunohistochemical
tests for FeLV and feline sarcoma virus (FeSV) were also negative.s?
• Clinical Findings. Affected cats are often young (1 to 2 years of age) and spend
time outdoors in rural areas. Single or multiple nodules, up to 2 em in diameter, which
are often ulcerated, occur most commonly on the nasal philtrum (Fig. 20-58).20. 168
Lesions also occur on the external nares, upper lip, digits, pinnae, and tip of tail. The
lesions are usually slow growing but often recur with markedly increased growth rate after
surgical excision.
• Diagnosis. Histologically, nonencapsulated, poorly demarcated dermal nodules are
characterized by a dense proliferation of fibroblastic cells with prominent Swirling. The
overlying epidermis forms long, pointed rete ridges (Fig. 20-59), and spindle cells may
abut the epidermis in a picket fencelikeconfiguration.
• Clinical Management. Good responses have been gained with cryosurgery, radiotherapy, or amputation (pinna, tail).20

FIBROSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Fibrosarcomas (fibroblastic spindle cell sarcomas) are
common (in cats) to uncommon (in dogs) neoplasms arising from dermal or subcutaneous
fibroblasts. The cause of fibrosarcomas in older animals is unknown. Some feline fibrosarcomas are virus induced. 4 - 7• 172 Such fibrosarcomas, and cell-free extracts derived from
them, contain C-type virus particles. Cell-free extracts produce multicentric fibrosarcomas
when they are injected into kittens and puppies. Cats older than 5 years appear to be
more resistant to the oncogenic effects of FeSV and usually have no neoplasms or benign

1286 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-56. A, Multiple fibropruritic nodules over the rump of a dog with Ilea bite hypersensitivity. B,

Fibrosarcoma. Fleshy masses involving both nostrils. (Courtesy J. Harvey.) C, Multiple fibrosarcomas over the
trunk of a young, feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive cat. D, Schwannoma on the hock of a dog. E, Multiple
solar-induced hemangiomas in a Saluki. (Courtesy A. Hargis.) F, Bluish hemangioma on the left pinna of a cat. G,
Hemangiosarcoma on the face of a cat. H, Hemangiopericytoma on the proximal front limb of a dog.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1287

FIGURE 20-57. Canine fibropruritic nodule.

neoplasms that spontaneously regress. The FeSV is a mutant of FeLV, and cats with
FeSV-induced fibrosarcomas are FeLV positive. FeSV is not associated with the solitary
fibrosarcomas in old cats. It is believed that injection site reactions (especially with FeLV
and rabies vaccines) may eventuate in fibrosarcomas in some cats, especially if vaccines
are repeatedly given at the same site (cervical, interscapular) (see Postvaccinal Sarcomas).253-257 Cytogenetic analysis of nine feline fibrosarcomas revealed heterogeneous karyotypic changes, including trisomy Dl, marker Fl, and nonrandom involvement of chromosome El, as well as mutations in the tumor-suppressor gene p53. 177- 180

• Clinical Findings
Dog. Fibrosarcomas are uncommon in the dog.1. 2, 4-7 They occur in older and female
dogs, and Cocker spaniels, Doberman pinschers, and Golden retrievers may be predisposed.': 4-7. 12. 16 Fibrosarcomas are usually solitary, irregular and nodular in shape, firm to
fleshy (see Figs. 20-56B and 20-60), poorly circumscribed, variably sized (1 to 15 em in
diameter), and subcutaneous in location. They are often ulcerated and alopecic. Lesions
occur most commonly on the limbs and the trunk. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
has been reported in association with canine fibrosarcoma.
Cat. Fibrosarcomas are common in the cat." FeSV-associated fibrosarcomas are
seen in cats younger than 5 years of age and are usually multicentric (see Fig. 2056C).1, 2,4-7, 172 Fibrosarcomas that are not associated with FeSV are seen in older cats
'See references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 26, 33, 35, 171.

1288 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-58. Feline sarcoid.
Well-circumscribed, ulcerated nodule on muzzle.

(average age 12 years) and are typically solitary. Lesions occur most commonly on the
trunk, the distal limbs, and the pinnae. Postvaccination fibrosarcomas obviously occur at
the sites of previous injections.253-257 The neoplasms are generally irregular and nodular in
shape, firm to fleshy, poorly circumscribed, variably sized (1 to 15 em in diameter), and
subcutaneous (trunk and distal limbs) or dermal (pinnae and digits) in location. They are
frequently alopecic and ulcerated. Most fibrosarcomas demonstrate rapid, infiltrative
growth, with metastasis (regional lymph nodes, lung) occurring in less than 20% of the
cases. I, 4-7.16.23. 171
• Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals pleomorphic, atypical fibroblasts (Fig.
20-6lA). Histopathologically, fibrosarcomas are characterized by interwoven bundles of
immature fibroblasts and moderate numbers of collagen fibers. 1, 2, 33, 171 The neoplastic
cells are usually fusiform, mitotic figures are common, and cellular atypia is pronounced
(Fig. 20-61B). Areas of necrosis or hemorrhage are not uncommon. Fibrosarcomas with
focal areas of mucinous or myxomatous degeneration are often called fibromyxosarcomas.
Fibrosarcomas are positive for vimentin. 47, 49, 50. 58 AgNOR counts and PCNA indices
significantly correlated with the proliferative activity of fibrosarcomas but not with the
mitotic indices.F"
Fibrosarcomas arising in subcutaneous vaccination sites are accompanied by a lymphoid and granulomatous inflammatory response at the periphery, with epithelioid macrophages and multinucleate histiocytic giant cells, which have an amorphous gray-brown to
bluish material within their cytoplasm (see Postvaccinal Sarcomas).l.253-257 FeLV antigen
was demonstrated in feline multicentric fibrosarcomas but not in feline postvaccinal fibrosarcomas.P'?
• Clinical Management. The clinical management of choice for fibrosarcomas is
wide surgical excision.v": 19. 171 Radiotherapy, chemotherapy (with (Adriamycin), doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and vincristine), immunotherapy (with mixed bacte-

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1289

FIGURE 20-59. Feline sarcoid. Dense, swirling proliferation of fibroblasts underlying a papillated epidermis
with long, pointed rete ridges.

rial vaccine and levamisole), and cryosurgery have been of limited benefit." Acemannan
(Acemannan Immunostimulant) is a carbohydrate moiety that enhances macrophage release of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), interleukin-l (IL-l), interleukin-f (IL-6), and
interferon-v (IFN-y), increases natural killer cell activity, enhances T cell function, and
enhances macrophage phagocytosis.A 175. 176 The product has been advocated (repeated
intraperitoneal and intratumoral injections) for the treatment of fibrosarcoma in cats and
dogs. 175 However, controlled studies are completely lacking, and the product is controver-

sial." 171
In a study of 44 cats with fibrosarcomas, it was found that the mitotic index and
tumor site correlated with prognosis, whereas histologic appearance, tumor size, and
duration of tumor growth did not. 169 Cats with fibrosarcomas of the head, the back, or the
limbs and with a mitotic index of 6 or greater had the poorest prognosis. In a study of 84
dogs with fibrosarcomas, the site of tumor occurrence, tumor size, and delay between
detection of the tumor and surgical excision had little influence on the prognosis for
recurrence or metastasis.F" Mitotic index of the neoplasms has a significant predictive
value for recurrence, postsurgical survival time, and metastasis.P: 170

MYXOMA AND MYXOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Myxomas and myxosarcomas are rare neoplasms of the
dog and cat arising from dermal or subcutaneous fibroblasts, the cause of which is
'See references 4-7, 23, 40, 171, 182, 183.

1290 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-60. Fibrosarcoma,
dog. (Courtesy H. Harvey.)

unknown. 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 33 Myxoma has been reported to develop at the site of a subcutaneous
pacemaker in a dog. 184
• Clinical Findings. These neoplasms usually occur in older dogs and cats, with no
sex predilections. Doberman pinschers and German shepherd dogs may be predisposed. 1
These neoplasms may occur more frequently on the limbs, the back, or the groin. 1 They
are usually solitary infiltrative growths that are soft, slimy, and poorly circumscribed and
have no definite shape. Myxomas are benign. Myxosarcomas are malignant but apparently
do not commonly metastasize. Both neoplasms frequently recur after surgery, owing to
their infiltrative growth patterns.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, myxomas and myxosarcomas are characterized by
stellate to fusiform cells distributed in a vacuolated, basophilic, mucinous stroma that may
be partitioned by collagenous connective tissue septae (Fig. 20-62).2. 33 Myxomas and
myxosarcomas are positive for vimentin.P"
• Clinical Management. In clinical management, the therapy of choice for myxomas
and myxosarcomas is radical surgical excision.v": 19
NODULAR FASCIITIS

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Nodular fasciitis (pseudosarcomatous fasciitis) is a rare,
benign, non-neoplastic growth of the dog and cat. 16, 33, 55 Nodular fasciitis is thought to
represent a proliferative inflammatory process arising from the subcutaneous fascia and
exhibiting a clinically aggressive behavior that suggests a locally invasive neoplasm.
• Clinical Findings. There are no age, breed, or sex predilections for dogs and cats.
Nodular fasciitis can occur anywhere on the body but may favor the head, the face, and
the eyelids. The masses are usually solitary, firm, poorly circumscribed, 0.2 to 5 cm in
diameter, and subcutaneous in location. In humans, nodular fasciitis is self-limited, and
thus, even if it is incompletely excised, it regresses. Cutaneous nodular fasciitis in dogs
and cats is also benign, but spontaneous regression has not been reported.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1291

FIGURE 20-61. Canine fibrosarcoma. A, Cytologic examination of
aspirate reveals pleomorphic, atypical fibroblasts. (Courtesy J. Blue.) B,
Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical
fibroblasts.

• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, nodular fasciitis is characterized by a poorly circumscribed, infiltrative proliferation of pleomorphic fibroblasts growing haphazardly in a highly
vascularized stroma with a varying amount of mucoid ground substance." Mitoses and
giant cells are common, and a chronic inflammatory infiltrate is often present.
• Clinical Management. The clinical management of nodular fasciitis in dogs and
cats has consisted of surgical excision.

Tumors of Neural Origin
SCHWANNOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Schwannomas (neurofibroma, neurilemoma, neurinoma,
or perineural fibroblastoma) are rare neoplasms of the dog and cat arising from dermal or
subcutaneous Schwann cells (nerve sheath)." The cause of schwannomas is unknown.
There is much confusion about terminology concerning these neoplasms in the veterinary literature. The lesions have been classified as neurinomas, neurilemomas, schwanno-

"See references 1, 2, 5-7, 16, 185, 189.

1292 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-62. Feline myxosarcoma. Atypical fibroblasts (fusiform-to-stellate) with abundant
ground substance (mucin).

mas, malignant schwannomas, neurofibromas, and neurofibrosarcomas.!" Some authors
have proposed the term peripheral nerve sheath tumor to include those neoplasms involving peripheral nerves and nerve roots, because of the presumed common cell of origin
(Schwann cell) and similar biological behavior.l's- 189
• Clinical Findings. Schwannomas usually occur in older dogs (average 9 years) and
cats (average 12 years), with no sex predilection. In cats, no breed predilection exists, but
in dogs, the Fox terrier may be predisposed.' Schwannomas are usually solitary. They
occur most commonly on the limbs, the head, and the neck in cats, but they occur more
commonly on the limbs, the head, and the tail in dogs (see Fig. 20-56D).1, 2, 5-7, 185, 189
Schwannomas are firm (especially in dogs), well circumscribed to poorly circumscribed,
often lobulated, variable in size, and dermal (especially in cats) to subcutaneous (especially
in dogs) in location, They are often alopecic. Rarely, schwannomas may be plexiform
(multinodular) (Fig. 20_63),189 There may be obvious nerve involvement with or without

FIGURE

20-63.

schwannoma, dog.

Multinodular

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1293

FIGURE 20-64. Canine schwannoma. Palisading spindle-shaped
cells with fine, wavy fibers.

neurologic deficit. Some lesions are painful or pruritic (owing to paresthesias?) and may
be complicated by acral lick derrnatitis.S 189 Schwannomas are often malignant and even
histologically benign lesions recur frequently after surgery.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, schwannomas are characterized by two patterns: (1)
neurofibroma-faintly eosinophilic, thin, wavy fibers lying in loosely textured strands that
extend in various directions, with spindle-shaped cells that may exhibit nuclear palisading
(Fig. 20-64); and (2) neurilemoma-areas of spindle-shaped cells exhibiting nuclear
palisading and twisting bands or rows (Antoni type A tissue), alternating with an edematous stroma containing relatively few haphazardly arranged cells (Antoni type B tissue)
(Fig. 20-65).1, 2, 5. 33 Benign and malignant histopathologic types are seen. These
neoplasms can be extremely pleomorphic, with cells being arranged in fascicles, sheets,
and whorls, and individual neoplastic cells being fusiform, ovoid to round, or multinu-

FIGURE 20-65. Canine schwannoma. Antoni A and B type tissue.

1294 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

cleated all in the same neoplasrn.l'" Schwannomas are positive for vimentin and 5-100
protein. 16. 49, 58
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.4 - 7, 19, 185, 189
Amputation may occasionally be necessary. Radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy,
and cryosurgery appear to be of minimal benefit. Schwannomas recur frequently after
surgery, which frequently results in euthanasia. Metastasis is rare.

NEUROTHEKEOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Neurothekeomas are rare benign cutaneous neoplasms
of Schwarm cell origin. 2 . 5 The cause of these neoplasms is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Neurothekeomas occur in dogs 2, 5 but not enough cases have
been seen to generate age, breed, or sex data. The lesions are solitary, firm, nodular, and
subcutaneous to dermal in location. They occur on the legs and digits.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, neurothekeomas are characterized by nests and
cords of cells in a variably mucinous matrix (Fig. 20-66). A close relationship to small
nerves may be seen. 2• 5
• Clinical Management. Clinical management includes surgical excision.
GRANULAR CELL TUMOR

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Granular cell tumors (granular cell myoblastoma, or
granular cell schwannoma) are rare neoplasms of the dog and cat. 1, 5, 186. 190 Although the
cell of origin is not established with certainty, current evidence suggests a neural source.
In humans, granular cell tumors contain neuron-specific enolase and myelin basic protein. 5 • 5 1 The cause of granular cell tumors is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Granular cell tumors have been reported in dogs from 2 to 13
years old, with no breed or sex predilection. Most of the neoplasms occurred as solitary,
firm, round, well-circumscribed masses within the tongue. Other dogs had a solitary
subcutaneous neoplasm near the shoulder or on the lip or ear, and one dog had multiple
dermoepidermal and subcutaneous malignant neoplasms with visceral metastasis (Fig. 20-

FIGURE 20-66. Canine neurothekeoma. Nests of neuroid tissue.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1295

FIGURE 20-67. Malignant granular cell tumors on the thorax of a dog.

67).5. 186, 190 Most canine granular cell tumors have been benign. In cats, granular cell
tumors have been seen on the tongue, vulva, and digits. 190
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, granular cell tumors are characterized by a circumscribed mass of ovoid to polyhedral cells with central or eccentric nuclei and pale
cytoplasm containing numerous small, faintly eosinophilic granules. I, 5, 186, 190 The tumor
cells may be arranged diffusely or in nests and rows (Fig. 20-68). The cytoplasmic
granules are PAS positive. The pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia that so frequently overlies granular cell tumors in humans is rarely seen in dogs and cats. Canine granular cell
tumors are positive for neuron-specific enolase and variably positive for vimentin and
S-IOO protein.P" 190

FIGURE 20-68. Canine malignant granular cell tumor. Cords and clusters of anaplastic
cells with fine, eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules.

1296 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for granular cell tumors is surgical
excision.Pr?

MENINGIOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Primary cutaneous (extraneuraxial) meningioma is exceedingly rare in the dog. l 88 Although the cause of these lesions is unknown, it is
hypothesized that they originate from arachnoid cap cell rests displaced during embryogenesis into the skin.
• Clinical Findings. An ll-year-old Poodle had a firm, well-circumscribed, 3-cmdiameter, subcutaneous mass in the right hind leg that had been enlarging for several
months. 188
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, meningiomas show a uniform and lobulated arrangement of solid masses of ovoid to elongated cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm.I'" Most
cells form concentric whorls around central small capillary spaces that are often obliterated. Electron microscopy reveals characteristic delicate intracytoplasmic filaments.
• Clinical Management. Surgical excision is curative.

TAIL DOCK NEUROMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Tail dock neuroma occurs rarely in dogs as a sequela to
cosmetic or therapeutic caudectomy.! 2. 187 Neuromas are a manifestation of traumatic or
surgical nerve transection, followed by disorganized proliferation of the proximal nerve
stump because of poor apposition or the absence of the distal nerve segment.
• Clinical Findings. Historically, affected dogs have inflicted self-trauma to the tail
since puppyhood, beginning soon after tail docking. Physical examination reveals a painful,
alopecic, hyperpigmented, lichenified, excoriated dermatosis at the tip of the tail. The
underlying connective tissue is thickened and firm. Cocker spaniels may be predisposed.
Dogs with a neuroma following surgical amputation for a variety of disorders (trauma,
neoplasia, or tail biting) have the onset of symptoms following surgery (Fig. 20-69).

FIGURE 20-69. Tail dock neuroma in a dog following amputation of
tail tip.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1297

FIGURE 20-70. Canine tail
dock neuroma. Axonal sprouting in
a bed of fibrous connective tissue.
(Courtesy T. Gross.)

• Diagnosis. Histopathologic examination reveals axonal sprouting with secondary
remyelination in a bed of fibrous connective tissue (Fig. 20_70).2.187
• Clinical Management. Surgical excision is curative.

Tumors of Vascular Origin
HEMANGIOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiomas (angiomas) are uncommon (in dogs) to
rare (in cats) benign neoplasms arising from the endothelial cells of blood vessels." The
cause of most hemangiomas is unknown. C-type virus particles have been found in cells
from a subcutaneous hemangioma in a cat. 35 Studies strongly suggest that chronic solar
damage may be the cause of hemangiomas in the ventral glabrous skin of lightly pigmented, sparsely haired dogs. 2. 204. 205
• Clinical Findings
Dog. Hemangiomas are more common than hemangiosarcomas and occur in dogs at
an average age of 10 years with no sex predilection.!: 2. 4-7, 205 Dogs with lightly pigmented
and sparsely haired ventral abdomen and thorax have an increased incidence of hemangiomas (see Fig. 20-56E). Breeds at risk include Boxer, Golden retriever, German shepherd dog, English Springer spaniel, Airedale terrier, Whippet, Dalmatian, Beagle, American Staffordshire (pit bull) terrier, Basset hound, Saluki, and English pointer.v 12, 205
Multiple, presumably solar-induced hemangiomas have been reported in related whippets. 205 Hemangiomas are usually well circumscribed, firm to fluctuant, rounded, bluish to
reddish black, 0.5 to 4 ern in diameter, and dermal to subcutaneous in location.
Cat. Hemangiomas are less common than hemangiosarcomas, usually occur in animals older than 10 years of age, and most often affect male animals.v 211. 212 Lesions are
usually solitary and occur most commonly on the ears (see Fig. 20-56F), the face, the
neck, and the limbs. Hemangiomas are slow growing, usually well circumscribed, firm to
fluctuant, rounded, bluish to reddish black, 0.5 to 4 em in diameter, and dermal to

"See references 1, 2, 4-7, 14, 16, 33.

1298 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-71. Canine capillary hemangioma. Superficial dermal proliferation of normalappearing endothelial cells and blood vessels.

subcutaneous in location. Spontaneous or trauma-induced bleeding from these neoplasms
may occur .
• Diagnosis. Histologically, hemangiomas are characterized by the proliferation
of blood-filled vascular spaces lined by Single layers of well-differentiated endothelial
cells. I, 2. 33 Hemangiomas are often subclassified as cavernous or capillary, depending on
the size of the vascular spaces and the amount of intervening fibrous tissues (Figs. 20-71
and 20-72).1, 2. 5, 33 Solar-induced lesions are often less well circumscribed, and solar

FIGURE 20-72. Canine cavernous hemangioma. Deep dermal proliferation of widely dilated, blood-filled vessels.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1299

dermatitis and elastosis may be present.v 5, 205, 211 Electron microscopy may be beneficial in
determining the vascular origin of a neoplasm, because Weibel-Palade bodies are a specific cytoplasmic marker for endothelial cells." In addition, immunohistochemistry may be
useful, because vimentin, factor VIII-related antigen (von Willebrand's factor [vWf]), and
type IV collagen and laminin are found in vascular proliferations.f" 50, 55, 62, 212 In a recent
study,198 vWf and CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule [PECAM]) both
consistently marked normal vascular endothelium and all hemangiomas from dogs, Lectins
(e.g., Ulex europaeus [UEA-l]) are not good markers for canine vascular neoplasms.l'": 198
Anemia, purpura, thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia, and findings associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation have been reported in conjunction with hemangiomas. 204
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of hemangiomas may include surgical
excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v"

HEMANGIOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiosarcomas (angiosarcomas, or malignant hemangioendotheliomas) are uncommon malignant neoplasms of dogs and cats arising from
the endothelial cells of blood vessels. I, 2, 4-7, 194a, 211, 223 The cause of most hemangiosarcomas is unknown. In humans, they have been associated with exposure to thorium dioxide,
arsenicals, and vinyl chloride." Studies strongly suggest that chronic solar damage may be
the cause of hemangiosarcomas in the ventral glabrous skin of lightly pigmented, sparsely
coated dogs 2,205 and on the pinnae of white-eared cats. 212
• Clinical Findings
Dog. Hemangiosarcomas occur in dogs at an average of 10 years of age, with no
apparent sex predilection. Typical hemangiosarcomas occur most commonly in German
shepherd dogs, Golden retrievers, Bemese Mountain dogs, and Boxers." Lesions are
often rapidly-growing and are most commonly found on the trunk and the extremities.
Whippets, Dalmatians, beagles, greyhounds, American Staffordshire terriers, Basset
hounds, Salukis, English pointers, and other short-haired and light-skinned breeds are at
increased risk for solar-induced hemangiosarcomas.v 204, 205
Solar-induced hemangiosarcomas are often multiple and most common on the ventral
thorax and the abdomen. Typical hemangiosarcomas are usually solitary, whereas solarinduced lesions may be multiple, Dermal hemangiosarcomas (usually solar induced) are
well-to-poorly circumscribed, red to dark blue plaques or nodules that are usually less
than 2 cm in diameter. Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas (usually not solar-induced) are
poorly circumscribed, dark red or blue-black, bruiselike, spongy masses that can measure
up to 10 em in diameter. 205,223 Alopecia, thickened skin, hemorrhage, and ulceration are
common features of dermal or subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas.
Cat. Hemangiosarcomas usually occur in male cats older than 10 years of age, t
There is no breed predilection. White cats may be prone to cutaneous hemangiosarcoma
owing to the role of ultraviolet light exposure in the development of lesions.Pv Lesions
are usually solitary, rapidly growing, and occur most commonly on the head (see Fig. 2056G) and the pinna (especially in white-haired cats), on the limbs, and in the inguinal and
axillary regions. Dermal hemangiosarcomas are poorly circumscribed, red to dark blue
plaques or nodules that are usually less than 2 cm in diameter. Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas are poorly circumscribed, dark red or blue-black, spongy masses that can measure up to 10 em in diameter. Alopecia, thickened skin, hemorrhage, and ulceration are
common features of dermal or subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas. In one study,21I two
thirds of the cats with cutaneous hemangiosarcoma eventually developed multicentric
lesions. Proliferative vascular lesions of varying morphologic appearance are occasionally
seen on the digits and distal limbs of older cats (Fig. 20-73).201 These often have an
"See references 1, 4-7, 12, 16, 194a, 196, 219, 223,
[See references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 30, 207, 211, 212.

1300 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-73. Feline hemangiosarcoma. Paw is swollen and
studded with multifocal black
crusts.

aggressive biological behavior and have been referred to as "progressive angiomatosis,"
"hemangiomatosis," "infiltrative hemangioma," or "low-grade hemangiosarcoma." We concur with others-?' and would prefer to call these lesions Simply "hemangiosarcoma." A
peripheral arteriovenous fistula was reported in a cat with a hemangiosarcoma of a limb. 208
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, hemangiosarcomas are characterized by an invasive
proliferation of atypical endothelial cells with areas of vascular space formation (Figs. 2074A and B).o Solar-induced lesions may have associated solar dermatitis and solar elastosis.2, 2005 Hemangiosarcomas are positive for vimentin, S-100 protein, factor VIII - related
antigen (vWf), type IV collagen, and laminin. t In a recent study,198 vWf marked
73% and CD31 (PECAM) marked 100% of the canine hemangiosarcomas investigated,
vWf can be aberrantly expressed in some carcinomas and in macrophages.l'" CD31 also
reacts with normal canine lymphatic vessel endothelium and is probably of little or no
value in distinguishing between hemangiosarcomas and lymphangiosarcomas.l'" Lectins
(e.g., Ulex europaeus, UEA-l) are not good markers for canine vascular neoplasms.l'": 198
Anemia, purpura, thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia, and findings associated with
disseminated intravascular coagulation have been reported in conjunction with hemangiosarcomas. S,204
Because visceral hemangiosarcomas can metastasize to the skin, it has been suggested
that these skin tumors should be staged via hemogram, serum biochemistry, urinalysis,
thoracic radiographs, echocardiography, and abdominal ultrasonography.I?"
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for hemangiosarcomas is radical
surgical ex:cision.4-7, 19, 197, 223 However, after any form of therapy, the prognosis for
animals with hemangiosarcoma is poor, with local recurrence and metastasis being common. They are highly invasive and malignant in dogs, with an average survival time of 4
"See references 1, 2, 33, 205, 211, 212, 223.
t See references 47, 49-51, 55, 56, 62, 212.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1301

FIGURE 20-74. Canine hemangiosarcoma. A, Proliferation of
atypical vascular structures associated with necrosis and hemorrhage.
B, Close-up of A. Proliferation of
atypical endothelial cells and abnormal vascular structures.

months after diagnosis.182 In cats, hemangiosarcomas are reported to frequently recur after
surgical excision but to metastasize rarely. 14, 211, 212, 217 However, in a recent report,207 all
cats with cutaneous hemangiosarcoma developed metastatic lesions. Early amputation is
usually curative for feline hemangiosarcomas of the distal limbs and digits. Palliative
responses have been obtained in dogs with the concomitant administration of doxorubicin
and vincristine.v-- 7
Canine cutaneous hemangiosarcomas were staged based on the depth of histologic
location: stage I (dermal), stage II (subcutis), and stage III (down to muscle).223 Stage I
lesions were small, raised, red-purple nodules; were commonly found on the ventral
abdomen, prepuce, and pelvic limb; and had a median postsurgical survival of 780 days.
Stage II and III lesions were larger, poorly circumscribed, soft to fluctuant, often bruiselike; had no anatomic site predilection, and had shorter postsurgical survival times (median
172 and 307 days, respectively, for stages II and III lesions). Six dogs with subcutaneous
(stage II) hemangiosarcomas achieved a median postsurgical survival of 425 days with
concurrent vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide (VAC) chemotherapy.s?"

1302 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-75. Multiple hernangiopericytomas on the front leg of a
dog.

Ideally, the efficacy of single-agent chemotherapy should be determined before combination therapy is attempted.Pv Some authors believe that combination chemotherapy
has no strong survival advantage compared with single-agent chemotherapy and recommend a doxorubicin-based protocol adjuvant to surgery.194a Mixed bacterial vaccines are of
no beneflt.l'" Dogs receiving surgery, chemotherapy, and liposome-encapsulated muramyl
tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine had significantly longer survival times (median, 277
days) than did dogs treated with surgery and chemotherapy alone (median, 143 days).221a

HEMANGIOPERICYTOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Hemangiopericytomas (peritheliomas) are common neoplasms of the dog arising from vascular pericytes." Rare cases of hemangiopericytoma
in cats have been reported.v 13. 14 The cause of hemangiopericytomas is unknown. Trisomy
2 (three copies of chromosome 2) has been reported in three cases of canine hemangiopericytoma.w? In another three cases, cytogenetic evaluation revealed different abnormalities in all three: trisomy 9; trisomy 2 and 29; trisomy 2 and deleted chromosomes."?
• Clinical Findings. Hemangiopericytomas occur in dogs at a mean age of 7 to 10
years. Boxers, German shepherd dogs, Cocker spaniels, Springer spaniels, Irish setters,
Siberian huskies, Fox terriers, Collies, and Beagles are predisposed. 1. 4-7. 16 There is no
apparent sex predilection. Hemangiopericytomas are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the limbs (especially the stifle and elbow). They are usually firm, multinodular,
well circumscribed, 2 to 25 em in diameter, and dermal to subcutaneous in location (Fig.
20-75; see Fig. 20-56H). Alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and ulceration are common.
• Diagnosis. Several patterns are associated with the hemangiopericytoma, and one
pattern may predominate or several patterns may be identified within the same mass. This
variable histopathologic appearance is considered unique to the hemangiopericytoma.' The
classic pattern is the perivascular whorls (fingerprint pattern) of spindle-shaped to ovoid
cells (Fig. 20-76A and B). t Other patterns include storiform, myxoid, and epithelioid.
Hemangiopericytomas are positive for vimentirr'" 56, 213 but negative for S_100203a and
factor VIII-related antigen. 213 Fifty percent of the tumors coexpress muscle actin. 213
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for hemangiopericytomas is surgical
excision or amputation.v": 19. 202. 215 Recurrent tumors have fewer whorls and look more

"See references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 202, 215, 226.
tSee references 1, 2, 4-7, 16, 33, 226.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1303

FIGURE 20-76. A, Canine
hemangiopericytoma. Perivascular
whorls of cells create a fingerprintlike appearance. B, Canine hemangiopericytoma. Perivascular proliferation of plump pericytes.

like fibrosarcomas.v 202, 215 About 30% or more of these neoplasms recur 4 months to 4
years after surgical excision, and about 60% were reported to recur after surgery and
orthovoltage radiation therapy.202, 215 In one study, tumors present for longer than 2
months before surgery and tumors with increasing degrees of necrosis histologically had
higher rates of recurrence.v" Metastasis is rare. 16, 202, 215
ANGIOKERATOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis Angiokeratomas are rare, benign, superficial, cutaneous
telangiectases with an associated epithelial proliferation.v 5, 200, 211 The cause of angiokeratoma is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Angiokeratomas occur on the conjunctiva and skin of dogs (Fig.
20-77). The lesions are usually discrete, soft papules, 2 to 4 mm in diameter, that may be

1304 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-77. Angiokeratoma
on the thorax of a dog.

heavily melanized. Their color varies from red to black. Angiokeratoma occurred in the
interdigital space of a cat. 211
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, angiokeratomas are characterized by dilated and
engorged superficial dermal blood vessels with a hyperplastic overlying epidermis (Fig.
20-78).2. 15.200.211
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of angiokeratomas includes surgical
excision and observation without treatment.

elDIOPATHIC TELANGIECTASIA
Idiopathic telangiectasia resembling essential telangiectasia of humans was diagnosed in a
12-year-old dog. 196a The condition had been present for 3 years and was characterized by

FIGURE 20-78. Canine angiokeratoma. Dilated, blood-filled superficial dermal vessels
surrounded by hyperplastic epidermal collarettes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1305

erythema of the antebrachial region of both front limbs. The dermatosis was asymptomatic. Histopathologic findings included dilatation and proliferation of superficial dermal
blood vessels. Alkaline phosphatase activity was absent in the abnormal vessels, suggesting
that they were venules.

LYMPHANGIOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Lymphangiomas (angiomas) are rare benign neoplasms
of the dog and cat. They arise from the endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels'!, 2, 4-7, 16
Their cause is unknown, and some authors consider them hamartomas. Surgical trauma
may occasionally be the cause. 224 The terminology used for benign lymphatic vessel lesions
is confusing, with congenital lesions being referred to as congenital lymphangioma, congenital lymphangiectasis, and lymphatic hamartoma. Acquired lesions are called acquired
lymphangioma, lymphangiectasis, or lymphangiomatosis.
• Clinical Findings. Lymphangiomas have been reported in dogs and cats from
younger than 1 to 8 years of age, with no apparent breed or sex predilection." Lesions
appear as fluctuant swellings up to 18 em in diameter, which often appear poorly circumscribed (Fig. 20-79A). Lymphangiomas may be accompanied by pitting edema and turgid
vesicles (Fig. 20- 79B) and often drainage of a serous to milky fluid (lymphorrhea).
Axillary and inguinal areas and limbs are most commonly affected.
• Diagnosis. Histologically, lymphangiomas are characterized by a proliferation of
variably sized, cavernous, angular vascular spaces. They are lined by a single layer of
flattened endothelial cells and occur within the dermis, the subcutis, or both (Fig. 2080).1,2,5 Lymphangiomas are vimentin, vWf, and CD31 positive.192a. 195. 198
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for lymphangiomas is surgical excision, but recurrence is common.v 195 Amputation may be necessary. Radiation therapy was
successful in a dog with recurring lymphangtoma.P' In another dog with an unresectable
lymphangioma, the condition was controlled with intermittent administration of furosemide. 224
LYMPHANGIOSARCOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Lymphangiosarcoma (angiosarcoma) is a rare malignant
neoplasm arising from the endothelial cells of lymphatic vessels. I, 2, 4-7, 16 The cause of
lymphangiosarcoma is unknown, although in humans, the neoplasm often arises in areas of
chronic lymphedema."
• Clinical Findings
Dog. Lymphangiosarcoma has occurred in dogs from younger than 1 to 11 years of
age, with no apparent breed or sex predilection.v 5, 192, 216, 218 Lesions are usually solitary,
poorly circumscribed, fluctuant swellings up to 20 em in diameter. Pitting edema, serous
drainage (lymphorrhea), purpura, and ulceration may be present. The limbs and the
ventral abdomen are most often affected.
Cat. Lymphangiosarcoma has occurred in adult and aged cats, with no apparent
breed or sex predilection.v 5, 14,206, 220. 222 Lesions are typically a diffuse area of plaquelike
thickening or poorly circumscribed edematous mass of the ventral abdomen (see Fig. 2079C) or draining tract to cystIike areas on a limb. Lesions are usually rapidly growing.
Affected skin may be erythematous to purplish, is soft and spongy, and oozes a serosanguineous fluid (lymphorrhea) (see Fig. 20-79D). Regional lymph nodes are often involved.
• Diagnosis. Histologically, lymphangiosarcoma is characterized by the proliferation
of bizarre, atypical endothelial cells that tend to form variable-sized vascular spaces and

'See references 2, 4-7, 193, 195, 199, 214, 224, 225.

1306 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-79. A, Canine lymphangioma. Purpuric mass in the groin. B, Canine lymphangioma. Multiple
vesicles and bullae filled with clear-to-milky fluid on the medial thigh. C, Feline lymphangiosarcoma. Multiple
purpuric, oozing plaques on the abdomen. D, Feline lymphangiosarcoma. Oozing, purpuric plaque. E, Canine
lipoma. Soft, polypoid mass in the flank. P, Canine mast cell tumor. Two ulcerated plaques on the prepuce. G,
Canine mast cell tumor. Multiple subcutaneous nodules over the withers. H, Canine mast cell tumor. Erythematous, edematous, and nodular lesions in the groin.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1307

FIGURE 20-80. Canine lymphangioma. Proliferation of lymphatic vessels.

surround collagen fibrils (Figs. 20-81 and 20-82).1. 2. 5. 206 The neoplastic vessels are
characterized by tortuous shapes, a lack of pericytes, and little or no blood. A pleomorphic
inflammatory infiltrate is usually present. Lymphangiosarcomas are vimentin positive, and
may be vWf and CD31 positive. 192, 198, 206. 216. 218 Electron microscopy (no basement
membrane in lymphatics) and immunohistochemical identification of collagen type IV (not
present in lymphatics) may be the only definitive way of distinguishing lymphangiosarcoma
from hemangiosarcoma.s'" Weibel-Palade bodies have been found in lymphatic endothelial
cells. 218

FIGURE 20-81. Feline lymphangiosarcoma. Atypical endothelial cells forming vessels and
infiltrating between collagen bundles.

1308 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-82. Close-up of Figure 20-81. Pleomorphic and atypical endothelial cells
lining vessels and budding off into the vascular lumen.

• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is radical surgical eXCISIOn or
amputation.v" 16, 216 Recurrence and metastasis are common in dogs.!' 5, 192, 216 Local
recurrence is common in cats,2,5, 14,216 and metastasis was recorded (lung, liver, spleen) in
three of nine cats in one study.206

Tumors of Adipose Origin
LIPOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Lipomas are common (in dogs) to uncommon (in cats)
benign neoplasms arising from subcutaneous lipocytes (adipocytes).l, 2, 4-7,16 The cause of
lipomas is unknown. Cytogenetic analysis of two feline lipomas was reported.F" One
neoplasm had a reciprocal translocation of chromosomes B4 and C1, and in the other, an
F1-marker chromosome was detected. Similar studies were conducted in dogs. 234a
• Clinical Findings. Usually, these neoplasms occur in dogs and cats older than 8
years. There is no sex predilection in cats, but Siamese may be predisposed.' However, in
dogs, lipomas are reported to occur more frequently in Cocker spaniels, Dachshunds,
Weimaraners, Doberman pinschers, miniature Schnauzers, Labrador retrievers, and small
terriers and in obese female dogs.': 5 Lipomas may be single or multiple and occur most
often over the thorax (Fig. 20-83), the brisket, the abdomen, and the proximal limbs (see
Fig. 20- 79E). They are usually dome shaped or pedunculated, well circumscribed, soft to
flabby, variable in size (1 to 30 cm in diameter), often multilobulated, and subcutaneous
in location. Some lipomas are firm, owing to the presence of fibrous tissue, and are found
to be fibrolipomas histologically. 2, 5, 16 Some lipomas are painful and are found to be
angiolieomas histologically.f 16 Some lipomas are hyperpigmented (Fig. 20-84).
lriflltrative lipomas are uncommon in dogs and cats. 1, 2, 5, 228, 229, 231 These neoplasms
have previously been termed "lipomatosis" and "well-differentiated liposarcoma." These
tumors occur in middle-aged animals (average 6 years) and have a predilection for female
animals (4: 1). Doberman pinschers and Labrador retrievers may be predisposed. Obesity
does not appear to be a prerequisite. These tumors occur most frequently on the extremi-

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1309

FIGURE 20-83. Huge lipoma on
the ventral thorax of a dog.

ties, the thorax, and the neck. The neoplasms are large, poorly circumscribed, soft, deep
subcutaneous masses that infiltrate adjacent muscle, fascia, tendon, joint capsule, and
bone; they may cause dysfunction because of mechanical interference or pressure pain. 231
• Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals an often acellular preparation containing
numerous lipid droplets (Fig. 20-85). Histologically, lipomas are characterized by a wellcircumscribed proliferation of normal-appearing lipocytes (Figs. 20-86 and 20_87).1,2,33
Some neoplasms have a marked fibrous tissue component and are called fibrolipomas.
Infiltrative lipomas are characterized by a poorly circumscribed proliferation of normalappearing lipocytes that infiltrates surrounding tissues, especially muscle and collagen. 2,228
Angiolipomas are characterized by mature adipose tissue with a complex, branching blood
vascular component (Fig. 20-88).5 Lipomas are positive for vimentin.e"- 50, 58
• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice for all types of lipomas is surgical
excision.v ? In obese animals, a restricted diet for a few weeks before surgery often
reduces the size of the neoplasms and improves the definition from surrounding tissues.
Small, asymptomatic lipomas are often merely observed, unless they grow large. Lipomas
that are large can usually be easily peeled out, because they are well circumscribed and

FIGURE 20-84. Pigmented lipoma in the flank of a dog.

1310 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-85. Canine lipoma.
Cytologic examination of aspirate reveals fat droplets (arrows).

FIGURE 20-86. Feline lipoma. Proliferation of normal-appearing fat.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1311

FIGURE 20-87. Close-up of Figure 20-86. Normal-appearing lipocytes.

have a poor blood supply. The intratumoral injection of 10% calcium chloride solution
caused complete remission in 4 of 18 canine lipomas treated, with a 50% reduction in size
of the other 14 treated tumors.P? Although infiltrative lipomas are not malignant, they
necessitate radical surgical excision to prevent local recurrence, which still may occur in
36% of the cases. 228 It is difficult to distinguish infiltrative lipoma from normal fat, thus
surgical margins are hard to define.

LIPOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Liposarcomas are rare malignant neoplasms of the dog
and cat; they arise from subcutaneous lipoblasts.': 2. 5- i. 16 The cause of liposarcomas is

FIGURE 20-88. Canine angiolipoma. Proliferation of lipocytes with a central branching
vascular component.

1312 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-89. Feline liposarcoma. Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical lipocytes.

unknown, although they can be induced in cats by injection of FeLV. 5 , 6, 235 One cat
developed a metastatic postvaccinal Itposarcoma.P? A glass fragment was found within a
liposarcoma in a dog. 233
• Clinical Findings. Liposarcomas occur in dogs and cats at an average of about 10
years of age. In cats, there are no breed or sex predilections, In dogs, liposarcomas may
be more common in Dachshunds, Shetland sheepdogs, and Brittany spaniels and in male
animals. 1, 5, 233 Although they may be multiple, liposarcomas are usually solitary. In dogs,
they occur most frequently on the ventral abdomen, the thorax, and the proximal limbs.
Liposarcomas are usually poorly circumscribed, firm to fleshy, variable in size (1 to 10 em
in diameter), and subcutaneous in location. Liposarcomas are malignant and infiltrative
but rarely metastasize (lymph nodes, lungs, liver).
• Diagnosis. Histologically, liposarcomas are characterized by a cellular, infiltrative
proliferation of atypical lipocytes with abundant, eosinophilic, finely vacuolated cytoplasm
(Fig. 20- 89). I, 2, 33 Liposarcomas may be histologically well differentiated, pleomorphic, or
myxoid.s 16,234 Liposarcomas are positive for vimentin and S-100 protein.j": 49, 50, 56, 58
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for liposarcomas is wide surgical
excision.S 19

Miscellaneous Mesenchymal Tumors

LEIOMYOMA AND LEIOMYOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas are extremely rare
skin neoplasms of dogs and cats; they arise from smooth muscle cells of arrector pili
muscles (piloleiomyomas) or cutaneous blood vessels (angioleiomyomas)." The cause of
these neoplasms is unknown,
• Clinical Findings. These neoplasms are usually solitary, firm, well circumscribed,
dermoepidermal in location, and less than 2 em in diameter, There are no reported age,

"See references 1, 2, 5-7, 14, 16, 33, 236.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1313

breed, or sex predilections. They may occur more frequently on the groin, the vulva, the
head, and the back (Fig. 20-90) Dermal intravascular leiomyosarcoma was diagnosed on
the digit of a cat. 236a
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas are characterized
by interlacing bundles of smooth muscle fibers that tend to intersect at right angles (Figs.
20-91A and B).I. 2. 33 Cell nuclei are usually cigar shaped with rounded blunt ends.
Masson trichrome stain is often helpful in distinguishing among tumors of muscle, collagen, and neural origin. Smooth muscle tumors are positive for vimentin, desmin, and S100 protein.w 50, 56, 58 Intravascular leiomyosarcoma was positive for vimentin and smooth
muscle actin. 236a
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.":" Dermal intravascular leiomyosarcoma is not metastatic.P'v

RHABDOMYOMA AND RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Rhabdomyomas and rhabdomyosarcomas are extremely
rare neoplasms of dogs and cats that arise from skeletal muscle." 13,237, 238 The cause of
these neoplasms is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Rhabdomyomas are reported most commonly on the pinna in
adult white-eared cats. 238 The lesions were raised, firm, well-circumscribed, red-purple
nodules, 1 to 2 cm in diameter, on the convex surface of the pinna. Rhabdomyosarcomas
were described on the pinna and in the inguinal region of adult cats. 237
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, these neoplasms consist of whorls and bundles of

FIGURE 20-90. Canine leiomyoma. Pigmented nodule (arrow) lateral to the vulva.

1314 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-91. Canine leiomyoma. A, Piloleiomyoma. B, Closeup
of A demonstrating the "right angle"
orientation of muscle fibers.

elongated spindle-shaped cells. 237• 238 Phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin enhances the appearance of cross-striations in tumor cells and bundles. Skeletal muscle tumors are positive for desmin and vimentin.t" 237
• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice is surgical excision.

OSTEOMA AND OSTEOSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Extraskeletal osteomas and osteosarcomas are rare in
dogs and cats. I. 5. 239. 241. 242 The cause of these neoplasms is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Osteoma cutis is reported in adult dogs and cats. I. 5. 240 The
lesions are solitary, discrete, firm nodules primarily involving proximal extremities (Fig.
20-92). Histopathologically, numerous trabeculae consisting of both woven and lamellar
bone, normal osteocytes within lacunae, and multinucleate osteoclasts are seen (Fig. 2093). Because osteoma-like changes may be seen in certain nevi and neoplasms or as
heterotypic ossification in response to repeated tissue injury (chronic inflammation and
calcinosis cutis), true osteomas must satisfy the following criteria: (1) growth unattached to

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1315

FIGURE 20-92. Canine osteoma. Solitary
nodule on the ventral thorax (the area has been
clipped).

periosteum or periarticular structures, (2) spontaneous occurrence (not secondary to
trauma or inflammation), and (3) origin that is not developmental.
Extraskeletal osteosarcomas have been reported in the skin and subcutaneous tissues
(especially trunk and proximal limb) of aged dogs and cats. I. 5. 239. 241. 242 Beagles and
Rottweilers may be at increased risk.242 Lesions are firm and 2.5 to 30 em in diameter.
Diagnostic criteria include: (1) uniform morphologic pattern of sarcomatous tissue that
excludes the possibility of mixed mesenchymal tissue, (2) production of malignant osteoid
or bone, (3) high mitotic index, and (4) exclusion of osseous origin. Metastatic lesions are
present in over 60% of the animals. Histopathologically, a proliferation of malignant
osteoblasts and variable amounts of osteoid are seen (Fig. 20-94). Neoplasms mayor may
not have sufficient mineralization to be radiographically evident. Osteosarcomas are positive for vimentin.f" 49 Median survival after diagnosis is about 2 months.v" Median survival
after surgery was 33 days, whereas median survival following surgery and chemotherapy
(doxorubicin or cisplatin) was 146 days.241
• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision ..5, 241. 242

CHONDROMA AND CHONDROSARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Chondromas and chondrosarcomas are extremely rare
skin neoplasms of the dog. 1. 243. 244 The cause of these neoplasms is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Primary cutaneous chondroma was diagnosed in a lO-year-old
Labrador retriever. 1 The lesion was solitary, firm, 1 em in diameter, and located on the
head, Histologically, mature chondrocytes formed a nodule within the dermis and subcutis.
Primary cutaneous chondrosarcomas were diagnosed in a few dogs.1, 243, 244 Most were
adult to aged animals, and mostly medium to large breed dogs (especially German
shepherd, Golden retriever, Boxer). Lesions were solitary, firm, and multilobulated, and

1316 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-93. Feline osteoma. Bone formation in
the subcutis.

occurred in the subcutaneous tissue of the neck, flank, groin, limb, and thorax. Histologically, malignant cells with chondroid differentiation (Fig. 20-95) formed nodules within
the dermis and subcutis.
• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision.

FIGURE 20-94. Canine osteosarcoma. Invasive proliferation of atypical osteoblasts and osteoid formation.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1317

FIGURE 20-95. Canine chondrosarcoma. Proliferation of sarcoma
cells with chondroid differentiation.

POSTVACCINAL SARCOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. The incidence of postvaccinal sarcomas in cats has
increased in the last decade.F'- 247, 253-257, 261 Yearly prevalence estimates are 1 to 10 cases/
10,000 cats.247, 253 Epidemiologic studies have suggested that feline postvaccinal sarcomas
occur most frequently: (1) if vaccines are repeatedly given at the same site, (2) following
rabies or FeLV vaccines, and (3) when adjuvated vaccines are used. 247, 252, 253, 255, 261
However, cases have been reported in association with other killed, adjuvated vaccines
(e.g., panleukopenia), with modified live vaccines (e.g., herpes-calici-parvo), and with the
injection of three drugs (penicillin, metoclopramide, dexamethasone) in the same syringe. 246, 250a. 253, 257 There were no apparent differences in occurrence with different
brands of rabies and FeLV vaccines. 247, 253 In one study,254 the number of postvaccinal
sarcomas declined abruptly when a switch was made to modified live virus vaccines.
The macrophages and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells associated with postvaccinal sarcomas contain granular to crystalline, gray-brown to bluish material within their
cytoplasm. Electron probe x-ray microanalysis revealed that the material was composed of
aluminum and oxygen, and aluminum hydroxide and aluminum phosphate are used as
adjuvants in some feline vaccines. 253, 255, 257, 261 It has been hypothesized that the chronic
inflammation that follows vaccine reactions, with resultant proliferation of resident fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, causes neoplastic transformation.s'" 251, 255, 257 Thus, postvaccinal
granulomatous and necrotizing panniculitides could be viewed as premalignant lesions.'?'
A short-term (4 weeks) study was conducted on the local effects of various vaccines in
cats. 2OO Specific pathogen-free (SPF) cats were injected with FeLV, rabies, and rhinotracheitis-calicivirus-panleukopenia vaccines, and saline. Repeated physical and cytologic
examinations were performed. Only rabies vaccine caused palpable lesions in all cats, and
cytologic examination revealed increasing numbers of lymphocytes and macrophages with
fewer eosinophils and neutrophils. The macrophages often contain granular to crystalline
bluish material in their cytoplasm.
Immunohistochemical and peR techniques detected FeLV antigen in multicentric
feline fibrosarcomas but not in feline postvaccinal sarcomas.P'"
• Clinical Findings. Postvaccinal sarcomas develop in younger cats (average 8 years
versus 11 years) and are larger (larger than 4 em diameter) than nonvaccine-associated
sarcomas.P'" 252, 261 No breed or sex predilections are known. Postvaccinal sarcomas necessarily occur at sites of vaccination: interscapular area, dorsal neck, shoulder, flank, and
femoral area. Nonvaccine-associated sarcomas occur on the head, pinnae, and distal limbs.
Postvaccinal sarcomas are usually preceded by postvaccinal panniculitis. The lesions are

1318 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-96. Feline postvaccina! sarcoma. A, Huge tumor over
withers and left shoulder. B, Granulomatous reaction peripheral to sarcoma contains macrophages and
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells
(arrow) that have phagocytosed an
amorphous substance.

irregular in shape, firm, multilobular, and large (larger than 4 cm diameter in over 50% of
the cases).246, 248. 252, 255, 261 They are poorly circumscribed, involve the subcutis (and often
the underlying musculature; occasionally the dorsal spinous processes of the underlying
vertebrae), and exhibit rapid growth (Fig. 20-96A) .
• Diagnosis. The sudden occurrence of a tumor at an injection site, often preceded
by postvaccinal panniculitis, is highly suggestive. Most masses that occur within 3 weeks
following vaccination are granulomatous panniculitides, and these typically resolve within 1
to 3 months. Lesions that persist beyond this time, or show progressive enlargement after
4 weeks, should be aspirated for cytologic examination or biopsied.
Histopathologically, most postvaccinal sarcomas are fibrosarcomas. 0 Less common
neoplastic types include malignant fibrous histiocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma,
chondrosarcoma, liposarcoma, myxosarcoma, and myofibroblastic sarcoma. A characteristic
"See references 171, 246, 248, 251, 252, 255, 257, 261.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1319

finding with postvaccinal sarcoma is a peripheral granulomatous, often necrotizing, inflammatory response wherein macrophages and multinucleated histiocytic giant cells contain
granular to crystalline gray-brown to bluish material within their cytoplasm (see Fig. 2096B).246, 248, 251, 252, 257, 261 Lymphoid nodules or eosinophils, or both, may be prominent.
• Clinical Management. Postvaccinal sarcomas are locally invasive, poorly demarcated, and recur frequently following surgical excision. 246, 252, 252a, 255-257, 261 Surgery alone,
other than amputation where possible, is seldom curative. Recurrent sarcomas tend to be
more difficult to excise. In one study,252 postvaccinal sarcomas recurred in 86% of the cats
within 6 months after excision. Twenty-two percent of the cats had two to four recurrences. In contrast, only 14% of nonvaccinal sarcomas recurred after surgical excision.F"
Radical first excision provides a Significantly longer interval to first recurrence (325 days)
than marginal first excision (79 days),252a Excision at a referral institution resulted in a
Significantly longer interval to first recurrence (274 days) than excision at a referring
veterinary clinic (66 days),252a
Postvaccinal sarcomas were initially said to metastasize rarely.252 However, several
metastatic sarcomas have been reported.P! 230, 245, 250, 258, 259 Most of these metastases have
been from an interscapular sarcoma and have been of the fibrosarcoma histopathologic
type. Metastases have involved lung, liver, mediastinum, and pericardium. More recent
studies indicate metastatic rates of 22%252a to 24%,247a mostly to the lungs, which develop
concurrently with or after recurrence of the primary tumor.
It appears that postvaccinal sarcomas are more radiosensitive than nonvaccinal sarcomas, and that radiotherapy may be a useful postsurgical adjunctive therapy.l71, 247a, 255 As a
last resort, palliative control may be achieved in some cases with Adriamycin (1 mglkg
every 3 weeks for five or six treatmentsj.l?': 255
The following measures have been recommended to reduce the frequency of postvaccinal sarcomas in cats and to make epidemiologic studies more useful 252a, 254, 255, 261:
L Avoid unnecessary vaccines.
2. Use as little killed vaccines as possible,
3. Do not administer killed vaccines in the interscapular space (harder to excise,
higher recurrence rates, decreased survival),
4. Standardize vaccination sites (caudal half of left side of body for FeLV, caudal half
of right side of body for rabies).
5. Avoid previous vaccine sites.
6. Maintain detailed records about vaccinations (site, route, vaccine manufacturer,
vaccine type, vaccine serial number).
7. Instruct owners to watch for postvaccinal reactions and document their occurrence.
8, If postvaccinal skin reactions (a) persist for more than 3 months, (b) are larger
than 2 em in diameter, or (c) are increasing in size 1 month post-vaccination,
recommend biopsy or excision and biopsy. Fine-needle aspirates are not reliable.

UNDIFFERENTIATED SARCOMA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Classification of some mesenchymal neoplasms may be
difficult or impossible on histopathologic criteria.Pr": 19 Such anaplastic sarcomas are usually called undifferentiated, or spindle cell, sarcomas. Employing electron microscopy or
immunohistochemical (marker) techniques greatly reduces the incidence of such diagnoses, but these are not always available to practitioners, nor are they always economically
feasible.
• Clinical Findings. Undifferentiated sarcomas usually occur in older dogs and cats
and have the clinical features of fibrosarcomas, neurofibrosarcomas, and hemangiopericytomas. An aggressive undifferentiated sarcoma with widespread metastasis was reported in a
6-month-old Neapolitan Mastiff. 264 In cats, undifferentiated sarcoma has been reported to
involve the footpads of one or more feet. 35 Affected cats are usually lame, and affected
pads are soft, mushy, and painful, and may be ulcerated,
In dogs, an undifferentiated sarcoma has been reported to affect the digit. 262 Affected
dogs were 11 to 15 years old and had solitary, soft to firm, variably ulcerated masses

1320 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

involving a digit. Lesions were described as growing out of an ulcerated digital pad or
occurring around a claw bed. The tumors caused lameness. Histologically, the tumors
appeared to arise in the area of dense collagenous trabeculae located proximal to the fat
pad and atrichial sweat glands. The tumor cells had some features of histiocytes: nuclear
and cytoplasmic pleomorphism, frequent mitoses, and multinucleate tumor giant cells.
Although most of these tumors had neoplastic cells in vessels, no recurrences or metastases were recorded. Tumor cells were positive for vimentin, but negative for desmin, S-IOO
protein, and histiocyte markers. Electron microscopic examination revealed 200-nm to
400-nm intracytoplasmic secretory granules.
Undifferentiated sarcomas were reported in old dogs on the lower lip at the mucocutaneous junction.F" The tumors were about 2 to 3 em in diameter, frequently ulcerated,
and metastases (regional lymph node, lung) were recorded in 75% of the cases. Histologically, the tumors were similar to the digit tumors described earlier. 262 Extensive electron
microscopic and immunohistochemical studies failed to identify the neoplastic cells. The
authors suspected a myelomonocytic origin.
• Clinical Management. Radical surgical excision is the treatment of choice for
undifferentiated sarcomas.v 19 Radiotherapy or chemotherapy alone does not provide adequate control.P Radiotherapy plus hyperthermia may be more effective. 183

Mast Cell Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Mast cell tumors (mastocytomas, mast cell sarcomas, or mastocytoses) are common neoplasms of the dog and cat that arise from mast cells." The cause of mast cell tumors is
unknown. In dogs (especially puppies), mast cell tumors have been experimentally transmitted using tissues and cell-free extracts, which suggests a viral cause. However, ultrastructural examination of mast cell tumors has only occasionally revealed viral particles. It
has been theorized that Boxers and Boston terriers possess oncogenes that are transmitted
to offspring and combine with a genetically determined deficiency of immune surveillance
to result in an increased incidence of mast cell tumors in these breeds. Rarely, canine
mast cell tumor has been thought to arise within scars and chronic dermatoses.v 292
Chromosomal fragile site expression, a phenomenon thought to predispose humans genetically to develop certain tumors, have been shown to be increased in boxers with mast cell
tumors." In the dog, it has been suggested that abnormalities in the c-kitlc-kit ligand
system is involved in the pathogenesis of mast cell tumors.P" 284b, 293 Mutations of the c-kit
gene may lead to an activation of its product, the kit receptor, which leads to uncontrolled
proliferation and maturation of mast cell precursors.w'< 290a In cats, transmission studies
with various mast cell tumor extracts failed to produce neoplasms in normal individuals.
Multiple histiocytic mast cell tumors have been described in 6- to 8-week-old Siamese
kittens in which multiple kittens of two litters (sired by the same tom) were affected,
suggesting a genetic inHuence. 274

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Mast cell tumors occur in dogs at an average age of 8 years but are rarely reported in
puppies. t There is no apparent sex predilection, but Boxers, Boston terriers, English
bulldogs, Bull terriers, Fox terriers, Staffordshire terriers, Labrador retrievers, Dachshunds, Beagles, Pugs, Golden retrievers, Weimaraners, and Shar peis are at increased risk.
Shar peis are often younger than other breeds when they develop mast cell tumors
(average age, 4 years; 28% are younger than 2 years old).289 They may also be more likely
'See references 1, 2, 4- 7, 27, 30, 272, 282, 300.
t See references 1, 2, 4-7, 22, 28, 269, 275, 282, 289, 295.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors·· 1321

FIGURE 20-97. Canine mast cell tumor. Melanotic interdigital nodule.

to develop multiple lesions. The clinical appearance of mast cell tumors is variable.
Lesions may be firm to soft (see Fig. 20-79F), papular to nodular to pedunculated,
dermal to subcutaneous in location (see Fig. 20-79G), well to poorly circumscribed, and
skin colored to erythematous (see Fig. 20-79H) to hyperpigmented (Fig. 20-97). They
vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter. Some lesions may appear
as urticarial swellings or diffuse areas of edema and inflammation resembling cellulitis
(Fig. 20-98). Some neoplasms have a pin-feathered appearance (Fig. 20-99) or are

FIGURE 20-98. Canine mast
cell tumor. Swollen, cellulitic-appearing forelimb. (Courtesy D. Angarano.)

1322 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-99. Canine mast cell tumor.
Pin-feathered nodule over stifle region.

ulcerated. Palpation of some lesions may result in release of vasoactive substances and
resultant local edema and inflammation (Darier's sign). Flushing (sudden, symmetric,
diffuse reddening of large areas of skin) has been rarely reported in dogs with mast cell
tumors. Mast cell tumors are usually solitary but may be multicentric either synchronously
or sequentially. The neoplasms are distributed as follows: 50% on the trunk, 40% on the
extremities, and 10% on the head. Some interesting breed-site predilections have been
reported': Boxer (hind limbs, multiple lesions), Boston terrier (hind limb), Rhodesian
ridgeback (tail), American Staffordshire terrier (hind limb), Pug (hind limbs, multiple
lesions), Weimaraner (multiple lesions), and English setter (head, hind limb). Diffuse mast
cell tumor produced gross distention and deformity of the hind limbs in Shar peis. 284a, 285
Noncutaneous symptoms that can be associated with mast cell tumors include gastric
and duodenal ulcers, defective blood coagulation, and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.4-7. 269. 282
A case of cutaneous mastocytosis resembling urticaria pigmentosa was reported in a
puppy.276 At 3 weeks of age, the dog had multiple cutaneous papules and nodules,
pruritus, and lethargy. The lesions were generally alopecic, raised, pink to red, slightly
firm, 1 to 5 em in diameter, and especially numerous on the head, neck, legs, and
perineum. By the time the dog was 27 weeks old, the condition resolved spontaneously.
Urticaria pigmentosa-like disease was also reported in two adult dogs. 279 Both had
been affected since 6 months to 1 year of age. Papules and nodules would come and go
over many areas of the body. Biopsies revealed the accumulation of well-differentiated
mast cells in the superficial dermis and very few eosinophils. Occasionally, erythematous
rashes that would progress to wheals or bullae would appear and disappear within hours.
Traumatizing the lesions could produce sudden increase in size (edema), and stroking
normal skin could result in a wheal-and-flare response (Darier's sign). Both dogs were
otherwise healthy and were followed for several years. The lesions were responsive to
glucocorticoids, and to a combination of He and H 2-blocking antihistamines.
Cat

Mast cell tumors occur in cats at an average age of 10 years, although kittens can be
affected. I, 30, 272, 284, 290, 300 Male and Siamese cats are apparently predisposed. I. 282 Lesions
occur most commonly on the head and the neck. The clinical appearance of mast cell

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1323

tumors is variable: (1) multiple raised, soft, round, poorly demarcated, edematous, pinkish,
variable-sized (0.5 to 5 cm in diameter) masses that are fixed to the overlying skin; (2)
multiple raised, firm, round, well-circumscribed, white to yellow, small (2 to 10 mm in
diameter) papules and nodules that are fixed to the overlying skin (Fig. 20-100A); (3)
single or multiple raised, firm, erythematous, well-circumscribed, variable-sized (1 to 7 cm
in diameter) plaques (Fig. 20-100B) that are frequently ulcerated and pruritic; and (4)
solitary, firm to soft, well-circumscribed, variable-sized (0.3 to 3 em in diameter), often
alopecic dermal masses, some of which grossly mimic sebaceous gland tumors. Occasionally, solitary mast cell tumors may spontaneously resolve, only to be followed by a new
tumor at a different location (Fig. 20-100C).35. 272. 290, 300 A case of diffuse cutaneous
mastocytosis in a Lyear-old cat was reported.s" Generalized pruritus, papules, and erosions were present.
Urticaria pigmentosa is a proliferative mast cell disorder of humans.f 299 A syndrome
with some clinicopathologic similarities to the human disorder has been seen in cats (see
Chap. 12).
A histiocytic subtype of mast cell tumor occurs primarily in Siamese cats from 6
weeks to 4 years of age. 2, 30, 274, 300 Multiple firm, pinkish papules and nodules occur
primarily on the head and pinnae (Fig. 20-101) and eventually spontaneously regress.
Noncutaneous symptoms that may be associated with feline mast cell tumors include
gastric and duodenal ulcers (thought to be histamine induced) and defective blood coagulation (thought to be heparin induced).

DIAGNOSIS
This is one tumor in which stained impression smears or aspirates are useful in establishing a tentative immediate diagnosis (Fig. 20-102).7, 43, 45 However, anaplastic and histiocytic mast cells may not contain the distinctive cytoplasmic granules. Hence, cytologic
examination should not replace a complete histologic examination. Smears of cutaneous
mast cell tumors in cats may reveal endocytosis of erythrocytes by the neoplastic mast
cells.
Histologically, mast cell tumors are characterized by a diffuse to multinodular proliferation of mast cells (Figs. 20-103 and 20_104).1,2,23 Frequent findings in canine mast cell
tumors include tissue eosinophilia, focal areas of collagen degeneration, and a wide variety
of vascular lesions (hyalinization, fibrinoid degeneration, and eosinophilic vasculitis) (Fig.
20-105). Even highly malignant tumors usually have a low mitotic index, making this an
insensitive measure of tumor behavior.F" In cats, special caution is warranted to avoid
confusing mast cell tumors with other round cell tumors and eosinophilic plaques. However, the striking tissue eosinophilia and collagen degeneration seen commonly in canine
mast cell tumors is rare in cats.'- 30, 272, 300 The histiocytic mast cell tumor in cats (especially Siamese) often has a granulomatous appearance (Figs. 20-106A and B), and the
diagnosis can be confirmed only by electron microscopic demonstration of mast cell
granules in some cases. I, 2, 300 Canine mast cell tumors were subjected to several special
stains. 294 No stain was ideal, and all stains became less effective as tumor cells become
less differentiated. Feline mast cell tumors were negative for tryptase and erratically
positive for chyrnase.P" Mast cell tumors are positive for vimentin, Q'cantitrypsin, chymotrypsin-like protease, and dipeptidyl peptidase 11. 49, 54, 56, 59 Recent investigations suggest
that c-kit can be used as a reliable immunohistochemical marker for canine mast cells and
mast cell tumors. 293

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of mast cell tumors may include surgical excision, cryosurgery,
electrosurgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, immunotherapy, and some combination of
these. 4- 7, 281, 282, 297, 298 In dogs, mast cell tumors should always be treated as potentially
malignant neoplasms, because metastasis occurs in about 30% of cases (especially regional
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and bone marrow). Tumors arising from the perineum, the

1324 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-100. A, Feline mast cell tumor. Multiple papular-to-nodular lesions over the thorax (the area
has been clipped). B, Feline mast cell tumor. Large, ulcerated nodule between the eyes. C, Feline mast cell
tumor. Small, yellowish papule resembling a sebaceous gland tumor. D, Canine nonepithellotropic lymphoma.
Large erythematous plaques and multiple erythematous papules on a medial hind limb. E, Feline nonepitheliotropic lymphoma. Multiple erythematous plaques on the abdomen. F, Canine nonepitheliotropic lymphoma.
Raised, erythematous lesion in the shape of an arc or C over the withers (the area has been shaved). G, Canine
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). Erythroderma, alopecia, and scales. H, Canine epitheliotropic
lymphoma (pagetoid reticulosis). Erythema, infiltration, and ulceration of the lips.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1325

FIGURE 20-101. Feline histiocytic mast cell
tumor. A, Siamese kitten with multiple papules
and nodules on pinnae and forehead. B, Domestic
shorthair kitten with multiple, coalescent lesions
that have caused both pinnae to droop. (Courtesy
B. Kieger.)

prepuce, the scrotum, mucocutaneous sites, and the digits are more commonly aggressive
and malignant. Prognosis is based on tumor growth rate, tumor site, local tumor recurrence, systemic Signs, tumor staging, previous chemotherapy, histologic grading, AgNOR
frequency, and Ki-67 positivity.264a. 269. 27Th. 278a. 280. 282. 295. 295a However, biological behavior is
not always predictable. In general, Boxers have a better prognosis, mainly because they
have Significantly more well-differentiated mast cell tumors. 269. 282 In general, Shar peis
have a worse prognosis, because they have more poorly differentiated mast cell tumors.F"
A histologic grading system (Table 20-4) and a clinical staging system (Table 20-5) have
been developed for canine mast cell tumors. The recommended therapeutic approach for
each canine mast cell tumor case is based on an amalgamation of these systems (Table
20-6). The clinical staging system is predicated on the results of studies of lymph node
and bone marrow aspirates, as well as buffy coat examinations. However, mast cells may
be found in lymph node and bone marrow aspirates from normal dogs, as well as bufty
coat smears from dogs with allergic and ectoparasitic skin disease.F" On the basis of
results of quantitative bufty coat evaluations, the severity of mastocytemia in dogs without
mast cell tumors often exceeds that during tumor staging in dogs with mast cell tumors,

1326 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-102. Canine mast
cell tumor. Aspiration of a skin nodule reveals a clump of mast cells.

and random detection of mast cells in blood smears during hemogram determination in
dogs is usually not secondary to mast cell tumor. 288a
Early surgical excision is indicated in animals with a solitary neoplasm. Wide surgical
margins, at least 3 ern between the palpable tumor and the incision, are recommended
when possible. Approximately 50% of canine mast cell tumors recur, even after a wide

FIGURE 20-103. Feline mast cell tumor. Well-circumscribed, dome-shaped proliferation
of mast cells.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1327

FIGURE 20-104. Close-up of Figure 20-103. Proliferation of monomorphous mast cells.

surgical eXCISIon, usually within 4 months.v" 269, 270, 282, 295 Presurgical treatment with
intralesional or systemic glucocorticoids, or both, may decrease tumor volume and local
swelling and inflammation, thus helping to achieve adequate excision.P" Presurgical radiotherapy or intralesional deionized water might accomplish this, as well. 282 In dogs with
mast cell tumors, the survival time is related to the degree of histologic differentiation.F"
282, 286, 291, 296 For animals with high-grade mast cell tumors, the mean survival time is 18
weeks after diagnosis; with intermediate-grade tumors, 28 weeks; and with low-grade
tumors, 51 weeks. However, some veterinary pathologists believe that tumor grade is

FIGURE 20-105. Canine mast cell tumor. Diffuse proliferation of mast cells, marked
edema, and multifocal areas of collagenolysis.

1328 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-106. Feline histiocytic mast cell tumor. A, Mast cell
cytoplasmic granules do not stain
with H & E. B, Mast cell cytoplasmic granules stain with AOG.

• Table 20-4

HISTOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION OF MAST CELL
TUMORS

GRADE

MICROSCOPIC DESCRIPTION

High (anaplastic, Grade 1,270 Grade III291)

Highly cellular, indistinct cytoplasmic boundaries: irregular size and shape of nuclei, often frequent mitotic
figures; low number of cytoplasmic granules
Closely packed cells with indistinct cytoplasmic boundaries; nucleus to cytoplasm ratio lower than that of high
grade; mitotic figures infrequent; more granules than
in high-grade tumors
Clearly defined cytoplasmic boundary with regular,
spherical, or ovoid nucleus; mitotic figures rare; cytoplasmic granules large, deep staining, and plentiful

Intermediate (intermediate differentiation,
Grade 11,270 Grade 11 291)

Low (well differentiated, Grade III,270
Grade 1291)

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1329
• Table 20-5
Stage I

Stage II

Stage III

Stage IV

CLINICAL STAGING SYSTEM FOR MAST CELL
TUMORS
One tumor confined to the dermis without regional lymph node involvement
a. Without systemic signs
b. With systemic signs
One tumor confined to dermis with regional lymph node involvement
a. Without systemic signs
b. With systemic signs
Multiple dermal tumors; large infiltrating tumors with or without regional lymph node
involvement
a. Without systemic signs
b. With systemic signs
Any tumor with distant metastasis or recurrence with metastasis

From Tams TR, Macy DW: Canine mast cell tumors. Comp Cont Educ 3:873, 1981.

often an unreliable prognostic indicator and are reluctant to grade these neoplasms. I, 295
Histologic grade does not always correctly predict biological behavior (benign versus
malignant), especially in intermediate grades, which are the most frequent type. 264a
DNA ploidy status of canine mast cells tumors was not found to be of prognostic
signtficance.F" In one study,295 three methods were simultaneously evaluated for their
prognostic significance in dogs: histologic grading, argyrophilic nucleolar organizer regions
(AgNOR), and antiproliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). A combination of the three
methods was superior to any method alone, and these methods accurately predicted
outcome in about 80% of the cases. PCNA was best at distinguishing between recurrent,
nonrecurrent, and metastatic tumors. In another study,264a the number of Ki-67 positive
nuclei was Significantly and inversely associated with patient survival, whereas PCNA was
less accurate. Immunohistochemical detection of p53 tumor-suppressor protein was not
associated with histologic grade, tumor location, breed, tumor recurrence, or survival
time. 277b, 278a The AgNOR method was compared on fine-needle aspirate and biopsy
specimens, and results correlated well. 280
Radiotherapy is effective for mast cell tumors. 4-7, 298 When orthovoltage or megavoltage radiotherapy is given postsurgically for intermediate grade (grade II) mast cell
tumors in dogs, 94% to 97% of the animals were disease free for 1 year, 93% for 3 years,
and 86% for 5 years. 265. 277 Results are significantly worse for high-grade mast cell
tumors,277,298
In cats, the vast majority of cutaneous mast cell tumors are benign.v 30, 272, 282, 290, 300 A
histologic grading system similar to that used in dogs was evaluated in feline mast cell
tumors and found not to correlate with biological behavior. 272, 290 The authors have
followed some cats with cutaneous mast cell tumors and positive buffY coats for years with
no signs of systemic disease. In one study,290 there was no Significant difference between

• Table 20-6
STAGE

II
III

IV

SUGGESTED TREATMENT OF MAST CELL
TUMORS BASED ON CLINICAL STAGES
TREATMENT
Surgical excision only. (Surgery is defined as the excision of the tumor with a minimum
margin of 3 cm between palpable tumor and the incision line; such excision should include
regional lymph node when possible.)
Surgical excision plus radiation.
Intralesional steroids plus cimetidine. (Intralesional steroid is defined as the intralesional
injection of 1 mg of triamcinolone for eve!)' centimeter diameter of tumor. This dose is to
be administered eve!)' 2 weeks.)
Systemic steroids' plus cimetidine. t

•A dose of 0.5 mglkg of body weight of prednisolone to be administered every 24 to 48 hours.
[Cirnetidine should be given daily at a dose of 4 mg/kg q6h.
From Tams TR, Macy DW: Canine mast cell tumors. Camp Cant Educ 3:876, 1981.

1330 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

complete or incomplete surgical excision and recurrence! The histiocytic mast cell tumor
of cats, which is often characterized clinically by multiple cutaneous nodules in Siamese
cats younger than 4 years, undergoes spontaneous remission frequently.S 30, 274, 300 Adult,
non-Siamese cats with widespread lesions are more likely to have visceral mvolvement.s'"
Chemotherapy has been advocated for disseminated mast cell tumors.v" Administration of oral prednisolone or prednisone (0.5 mg/kg q24h) or intralesional triamcinolone (1
mg for every 1 cm of diameter of tumor) has been recommended (see Table 20-4). This
treatment may cause temporary regression of the tumors that may last a few to several
months. Only 20% of the dogs with mast cell tumors responded to 1 mglkg/day prednisone administered for 28 days, and responses were transient.P" Combination chemotherapy (glucocorticoids plus cyclophosphamide, vincristine, or vinblastine, for example) has
been recommended by some investigators. A cyclophosphamide-vinblastine-prednisone
combination produced a 78% response rate (all partial responses) with a median survival
time of 150 days in dogs with metastatic mast cell tumors.F'" A cyclophosphamidevincristine-prednisone-hydroxyurea combination produced a 60% response rate (mostly
partial responses) with a median response duration of only 53 days in dogs with measurable mast cell tumors.F?" A vinblastine-prednisone combination produced a 47% response
rate with a median response duration of 153 days.295a Lomustine produced predominantly
partial and temporary responses (mean 109 days) in 42% of treated dogs. 293a Only 7% of
the dogs with mast cell tumors responded to vincristine, and all responses were only
partial.288
Cimetidine (4 mglkg orally q6h) has been recommended in dogs with evidence of
systemic or lymph node involvement or with evidence of gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Cimetidine acts by competitively inhibiting the action of histamine on the H 2 receptors of
gastric parietal cells, thus reducing gastric acid output and concentration.
Deionized (distilled) water is hypo-osmotic and oncolytic. It has been injected into the
surgical margins following removal of canine mast cell tumors.269.278 The recurrence rate
with surgery alone was 52.6%, whereas that with surgery plus deionized water was
26.2%.278 In addition, small (smaller than 0.25 em") mast cell tumors were injected
intralesionally, and all regressed.F" Injections are usually administered every 1 to 3 weeks
for four treatments. In another study, deionized water was of no benefit, although none of
the dogs received as many as four postsurgical treatments.F''" The treatments are painful
and usually require heavy sedation, local anesthesia, or general anesthesia.
In dogs, there is a frequent tendency for local hemorrhage during surgery and
delayed wound healing at the site of tumor rernoval.l- 4-7, 269, 395 Cryosurgery, hyperthermia, or manipulation may rarely precipitate a shocklike reaction in dogs that have not
been pretreated with antihistamines. 1, 4-7, 269, 282

• LYMPHOHISTIOCYTIC NEOPLASMS

Tumors of Lymphocytic Origin
LYMPHOMA
Cutaneous lymphoma (malignant lymphoma, lymphosarcoma, lymphoreficular neoplasm,
lymphomatosis, or reticulum cell sarcoma) is an uncommon malignant cutaneous neoplasm
of the dog and cat." In cats, the cause of most types of lymphoma is FeLV, although
cats with cutaneous lymphoma are usually FeLV negative. Recently, it was reported that
40% of the feline cutaneous lymphomas tested were positive for FeLV antigen by immunohistochemical or PCR techniques.P" In dogs, the cause of lymphoma is unknown,
although (1) lymphoma can be transmitted to puppies by the injection of whole-cell
preparations of malignant lymphocytes, (2) C-type viruses were found in neoplastic cells
'See references 1. 2, 4-7, 14, 35, 317.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1331

FIGURE 20-107. Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Aspirate
from a skin nodule reveals pleomorphic, atypical lymphocytes.

from dogs with lymphoma, and (3) lymphoma has been induced in neonatal puppies by
injections of FeLV. 4 - 7, 312, 312a
Histologically, lymphoma can be divided into nonepitheliotropic and epitheliotropic
forms.f? The epitheliotropic lymphomas are a subset of cutaneous T cell lymphomas.
Mycosis fungoides and its associated leukemia, the Sezary syndrome, account for the
majority of cases of epidermotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma. pagetoid reticulosis
(Woringer-Kolopp and Ketron-Goodman types) is a T cell lymphoma in which the lymphoid infiltrate is almost entirely confined to the epidermis in the early stages of the
disease. Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are large-cell lymphomas of the dermis
and subcutis, and are a heterogeneous group with respect to immunophenotype. In
humans, B cell lymphomas may rarely be epitheliotropic, thus mimicking clinically and
histopathologically the T cell lymphomas.F" In addition, nonepitheliotropic cutaneous
lymphomas may be of T cell origin. 304a One study suggested that immunocytochemical
studies of cytospin preparations of fine-needle aspirates provided a practical, economical,
and accurate method for the diagnosis and phenotyping of canine Iymphoma.P"
Cytologic examination of aspirates reveals pleomorphic, atypical lymphocytes (Fig. 20107).
Nonepitheliotropic Cutaneous Lymphoma

Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma occurs in older dogs and cats with no sex predilection." In dogs, Boxers, St. Bernards, Basset hounds, Irish setters, Cocker spaniels,
German shepherd dogs, Golden retrievers, and Scottish terriers appear to be predisposed.
Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is the most common form of cutaneous lymphoma in the cat but is the least common form in the dog.57
Nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is usually generalized or multifocal and has a
variety of cutaneous manifestations. Nodules are present in virtually all cases; they are
firm, dermal or subcutaneous, often alopecic and red to purple (see Fig. 20-100D and
E).35.304 Exfoliative erythroderma is present in about 20% of cases, but pruritus and oral
mucosal involvement are rare. 304 Occasionally, lesions are present in bizarre, arciform, or
serpiginous shapes (see Fig. 20-100F).5, 303 Rarely, dogs and cats may have solitary skin
lesions. Affected animals usually have signs of systemic involvement. Rarely, nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is associated with monoclonal or biclonal gammopathies,

'See references 1, 2, 4-7, 14, 35, 306, 317.

1332 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-108. Feline nonepitheliotropic lymphoma. Diffuse dermal and subcutaneous
infiltration of neoplastic lymphocytes.

serum hyperviscosity, or hypercalcemia.v ? Symmetric cutaneous necrosis and sloughing of
the hind paws was seen in association with multicentric lymphoma in a cat,301 Progression
of the lesions is rapid, with lymph node and systemic metastasis.
Histologically, nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are characterized by diffuse
dermal and subcutaneous infiltration by malignant lymphocytes (Fig. 20-108). These
malignant lymphocytes are lymphocytic (well differentiated or poorly differentiated), lymphoblastic, histiocytic (most common), or "clear cell" in cytologic form (Figs. 20-107 to
20-109).1. 2, 4-7, 57 In dogs, most nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are T cell

FIGURE 20-109. Close-up of Figure 20-108. Neoplastic lymphocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1333

lymphomas, often of a CD4 to CD8 phenotype.P" 308 Some are classified as non-T, non-B
cell cutaneous lymphomas (null cell lymphomasi'j.'" Rarely, these lymphomas may be B
cell lymphomas.P" In cats, most nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are T cell lymphomas,308,315 and 40% of those tested have been positive for FeLV antigen by immunohistochemical or PCR methodology.P"
Clinical management of nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is usually unsuccessfu1. 4-7, 57, 304 Traditional regimens of combined chemotherapy or chemoimmunotherapy
may occasionally induce short-term (average, 8 months) remission. Rarely, surgical excision
of a solitary cutaneous lymphoma lesion results in long-term remission or, perhaps, cure.
The average survival from the onset of skin lesions to death (usually due to euthanasia) is
about 4 months.'?"
Epitheliotropic Cutaneous Lymphoma

Epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma is an uncommon cutaneous malignancy of dogs and
cats." Epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphomas are usually of T lymphocyte origin. t In most
instances, the cause of epitheliotropic lymphomas is unknown. There is controversy about
whether human mycosis fungoides, the prototypic epitheliotropic (T cell) lymphoma,
begins as a reactive process or as a neoplastic process.v 318 In human adult T cell
leukemia-lymphoma, the causative factor is believed to be the human T cell lymphotrophic virus type J.5 Epitheliotropic lymphoma of dogs and cats is of unknown etiology,
and all affected cats have been serologically negative for FeLY. However, tumor DNA
was extracted from a cat with epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma, amplified for
FeLV provirus by PCR, and shown to be positive.P? This suggests that FeLV may be
involved in the etiology of epitheliotropic cutaneous T cell lymphoma in cats, even when
cats test negative with commonly used methods of detecting FeLV antigen in blood.
Epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma encompasses a spectrum of disease, including
mycosis fungoides, Sezary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis."
Mycosis Fungoides

In dogs and cats, mycosis fungoides usually affects older animals (average of 9 to 11
years), with no apparent breed or sex predilections. Four clinical presentations are described: (1) generalized pruritic erythema and scaling (exfoliative erythroderma) (see Fig.
20-100G), which is usually misdiagnosed as allergy, scabies, or seborrhea; (2) mucocutaneous erythema, infiltration, depigmentation, and ulceration (see Fig. 20-100H, Fig. 20110A and B, and Fig. 20-111), which is usually misdiagnosed as immune-mediated
disease (pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, or lupus erythematosus); (3) solitary or
multiple cutaneous plaques or nodules (Fig. 20-110C and D); and (4) infiltrative and
ulcerative oral mucosal disease, which is usually misdiagnosed as a non-neoplastic, chronic
stomatitis (Fig. 20-110E).t Footpads may be hyperkeratotic, ulcerated, or depigmented (Fig. 20-112). Affected animals often have peripheral lymphadenopathy and signs
of systemic illness. In cats, lesions may be initially well-circumscribed, annular areas of
alopecia, erythema, and scaling (usually misdiagnosed as dermatophytosis or demodicosis)
(Fig. 20-110F).5, 302 Rarely, dogs have lesions isolated to the lips, nasal planum, nasal
philtrum, or anus. 318, 319 Mycosis fungoides developed within the lesions of alopecia mucinosa in cats (see Chap. 11)
Histopathologically, mycosis fungoides is characterized by epitheliotropism, Pautrier
microabscesses (focal accumulations of pleomorphic, atypical lymphocytes within the epithelium) (Figs. 20-113 and 20-114), and the presence of mycosis cells (large, 20p. to 30p.
lymphocytes with hyperchromatic, indented or folded nuclei) and Sezary, or Lutzner, cells
(smaller, 8p. to 20p. lymphocytes that have markedly hyperconvoluted nuclei with numerous finger-like projections, producing a classic cerebriform appearancel.'- 2, 5, 302, 328, 330

"See references 1, 2, 5, 302, 317, 332, 334.
tSee references 57, 302, 308, 309, 312, 313, 318, 319, 330.
[See references 5, 57, 302, 304, 308, 319, 332, 334,

1334 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-1 10. A, Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Depigmentation, infiltration, and mild erythema of
the nose and lips. B, Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Anus is infiltrated and ulcerated. C, Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Numerous nodules, some of which are ulcerated and crusted, on a background of exfoliative erythroderma. D, Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Numerous cauliflower-like nodules on the pinna with
background skin that appears normal. E, Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Infiltration and ulceration of the
oral mucosa. F, Feline epitheliotropic lymphoma. Annular area of alopecia, scaling, and mild erythema on the
head. G, Canine plasmacytoma. Erythematous papule at the base of the ear. H, Canine histiocytoma. Characteristic button tumor on the hock.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1335

FIGURE 20-111. Feline epitheliotropic lymphoma. Alopecia
and infiltration of muzzle and chin.

In dogs, the neoplastic lymphocytes are often more "histiocytic" in appearance than in
humans.v" 319 Often, a lichenoid band of pleomorphic lymphoid cells, with or without
plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils, is present in the superficial dermis and surrounding appendages. Epidermal mucinosis (acid mucopolysaccharides) and mild fibrosis
of the immediate subepidermal superficial dermis may be seen. In dogs, there is a striking
tropism for hair follicles and epitrichial sweat glands, unlike what is seen in humans.P'" 319
In addition, epidermotropism is still prominent in the tumor stage, unlike what is seen in
humans. 31B, 3 19

FIGURE 20-1 12. Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Hyperkeratotic, depigmented, infiltrated
footpads.

1336 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-1 13. Canine epitheliotropic lymphoma. Infiltration of the lower portion of
the epidermis with neoplastic lymphocytes.

The histopathologic distinction between mycosis fungoides and benign lymphocytic
dermatoses can be difficult to impossible. Large studies in humans have shown that
certain histopathologic findings-Pautrier microabscesses, markedly disproportionate epidermotropism, hyperconvoluted epidermal lymphocytes, haloed lymphocytes, epidermal
lymphocytes larger than dermal lymphocytes-are significantly more common in mycosis
fungoides. 325 , 327 However, none of these findings is of sufficient sensitivity or specificity to
serve as independent absolute diagnostic tools for mycosis fungoides, Unfortunately, even

FIGURE 20-114. Close-up of Figure 20-II3, Pautrier microabscess containing pleomorphic and atypical lymphocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1337

FIGURE 20-115. Feline epitheliotropic lymphoma. Typical Sezary cell.

lymphocyte immunophenotyping and genotyping (clonal T cell receptor chain gene rearrangements) are of poor sensitivity and specificity.305.331
Electron microscopy reveals many tumor cells characterized by a high ratio of nucleus
to cytoplasm, deep invaginations of the nuclear membrane (convoluted or cerebriform
nucleus), a relatively wide rim of peripheral chromatin, a paucity of organelles, and
peripheral cytoplasmic villi or projections (Fig. 20_115).2.5.302.328 Direct immunofluorescence testing may show the intercellular deposition of immunoglobulin in the epithelium,
falsely suggesting a diagnosis of pemphigus." 328
In canine mycosis fungoides, the neoplastic T cells are typically CD3 and CD8
positive. 57. 313. 318 In humans, the cells are typically CD3 and CD4 positive. In the minority
of canine cases, the T cells are CD4 and CD8 negative.P" 318 The majority of cases of
canine mycosis fungoides express T cell receptor (TCR) y8, the rest express TCR a B.57
Discordant pan T cell antigen expression is frequently observed in canine mycosis fungoides.57.318 In dogs, no significant correlations were found between epithelial lymphocyte
infiltration and keratinocyte ICAM-l and lymphocyte LFA-l expression.P! Thy-l-, factor
XIIIa-, MHCII-, CD4-, and CD18-positive dermal dendrocytes were seen in all cases of
canine mycosis fungoides, especially in the superficial dermis."? Clonal TCR rearrangement was demonstrated in canine mycosis fungoides."! Epitheliotropic lymphomas may
dedifferentiate or lose expression of various surface molecules.P"
The prognosis for animals with canine and feline mycosis fungoides is grave. 5. 7. 302. 304.
332. 334 In dogs, the average survival time from the onset of skin lesions until death (usually
due to euthanasia) is 5 to 10 months.f 304. 332. 334 Occasionally, dogs and cats with mycosis
fungoides may live for longer than 2 years after a diagnosis is made, with or without
treatment. 5. 318 Death is due to septicemia, metastatic lymphosarcoma, or euthanasia.
Therapy for mycosis fungoides in dogs and cats has usually been of little or no
benefit." Chemotherapy with various combinations of prednisolone, chlorambucil, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and methotrexate have occasionally produced some
degree of clinical improvement for 1 to 5 months. Rarely, solitary nodules can be surgically excised, with long-term remissions or cures ensuing." 332. 334

'See references 5, 7, 302, 304, 317, 332-334.

1338 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
The most commonly effective treatment of canine mycosis fungoides is the topical
application of mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustardl.f 317 Mechlorethamine hydrochloride,
10 mg, is dissolved in 50 ml of water or propylene glycol and applied to the clipped
surface (total body) two or three times weekly until lesions have regressed. The solution is
then applied as needed for maintenance (every 2 to 4 weeks). No signs of toxicity or drug
hypersensitivity have been reported in dogs. Occasionally, dogs have experienced demodicosis. Because mechlorethamine is a potent sensitizing agent in humans, gloves should be
worn when applying the drug, and the dog should not be handled for the first few hours
after application. In addition, exposure to the powder form or vapors from the drug can
produce burning of the eyes and throat. Although topical mechlorethamine appears to be
useful for managing the "dermatitic" and plaque stages of mycosis fungoides, no evidence
suggests that it alters in any way the ultimately fatal course of eventual systemic involvement. In addition, mechlorethamine is a topical carcinogen and cocarcinogen, and may be
associated with the subsequent development of cutaneous epithelial malignancies (squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma), colon cancer, and Hodgkin's disease in
humans."
In humans, topical carmustine (BCNU) has been reported to be effective in mycosis
fungoides, with fewer toxicities and hypersensitivity reactions than seen with topical mechlorethamine and no development of secondary skin neoplasms." Other therapies reported
to be of benefit in humans with mycosis fungoides include the administration of oral
retinoids or interferon, oral methoxsalen (8-methoxypsoralen) and subsequent exposure to
ultraviolet A light (PUVA), cyclosporine, photophoresis, and electron beam therapy."
Retinoids (isotretinoin at 1 to 8 rug/kg/day, etretinate at 1 to 8 mglkglday) have
occasionally been useful in dogs and cats with mycosis fungoides." 89. 90, 333 In one study,
only about 50% of the dogs with epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma that were treated with oral retinoids had a clinical improvement of more than
50%.333 Survival time in these dogs varied from 5 to 17 months (mean, 11 months).
Acitretin (1 mglkg q12h) was ineffective in a dog with nonepitheliotropic T cell lymphoma. 304a Cyclosporine and omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid-containing products have
not been effective." However, large doses of linoleic acid (3 mllkg of safflower oil [76%
linoleic acid] administered orally twice weekly) was reported to induce remissions in 7 of
10 dogs treated.t'" 322 About 50% of the dogs with mycosis fungoides treated with peg Lasparaginase (weekly or biweekly injections of 30 U/kg intramuscularly or intraperitoneally)
experienced a reduction in erythema and scaling. 320 However, there was no effect on
plaques and tumors, and no indication that the treatment prolonged survival time.
Anecdotal reports indicate that interferon (Roferon-A, Hoffman-LaRoche), 1 to 1.5
million units/m- BSA given subcutaneously three times/week, may be effective in dogs
with epitheliotropic lymphoma (see Chap. 3).88
One dog with mycosis fungoides (plaque on chin, submandibular lymph nodes) was
treated with dacarbazine (1000 mglm 2 intravenously in fluid drip over a 2-hour period;
three treatments at 3-week intervalsl.P" The disease was still in remission 1 year later.

Sezary's Syndrome
Sezary's syndrome is an epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma characterized by erythroderma
(generalized erythema), pruritus, peripheral lymphadenopathy, and the presence of Sezary,
or Lutzner, cells (see Mycosis Fungoides in this chapter) in the cutaneous infiltrate and in
the peripheral blood.'- 57, 319 Histopathologically, the skin biopsy specimens are usually
indistinguishable from those in mycosis fungoides. Most authors believe that Sezary's
syndrome and mycosis fungoides are variants of the same T cell lymphoma.
Sezary's syndrome is extremely rare in dogs 5. 57, 312, 329 and cats. 324 The animals have
generalized pruritus, exfoliative erythroderma, multiple skin plaques and nodules, and
lymphocytic leukemia (Fig. 20-116). Skin biopsies reveal epitheliotropic lymphoma. Sezary-like cells are found in the peripheral blood and the skin. As in mycosis fungoides, the
neoplastic lymphocytes in canine Sezary syndrome are CD3 and CD8 positive.F: 312 Dogs
and cats usually do not respond to chemotherapy.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1339

FIGURE 20-1 16. Sezary syndrome
in a dog. Depigmentation, erythema, infiltration, and alopecia of nose, muzzle,
chin, and periocular area.

Pagetoid Reticulosis
Pagetoid reticulosis occurs in two clinical forms: localized lesions (Woringer-Kolopp form)
with a benign clinical course, and generalized lesions (Ketron-Goodman form) with a
progressive clinical course. 57, 319, 323 Histologically, the disease exhibits early, almost exclusive invasion of epidermis and appendages by neoplastic lymphocytes. The neoplastic
lymphocytes are CD3 and CD8 positive and exclusively ylJi. T cells. 57, 323
In the dog, most cases of pagetoid reticulosis are the Ketron-Goodman form. 57, 319, 323, 332
Erythematous papules, plaques (Fig. 20-117), erosions, and ulcers are seen on the
mucocutaneous junctions, oral cavity, paws, and abdomen. Affected dogs become ill and
metastases have been recorded.f" 332 Cases of focal Woringer-Kolopp form have been
reported in dogs, but no details were given. 2

FIGURE 20-117. Pagetoid reticulosis in a dog. Alopecia, scaling,
crusting, and several erythematous
plaques and nodules on lateral thorax.

1340 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

Early histopathologic findings included extreme epitheliotropism (epidermis and adnexae) and monomorphous, haloed neoplastic lymphocytes (Figs. 20-118 and 20-119).
LYMPHOMATOID GRANULOMATOSIS

Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is a rare lymphohistiocytic proliferative disorder in
dogs.2• 326 The atypical lymphohistiocytic cells that characterize this disease are variably
CD3 positive, suggesting that this is an atypical T cell lymphoma.P"
Most dogs have only visceral lesions (especially cardiopulmonary and skeletal muscle).
Occasional cutaneous involvement has been characterized by multiple chronic, recurrent,
punctate to crateriform ulcers that heal with scarring (Fig. 20-120). Subcutaneous
plaques may be present. Lesions involve the face, the eyelids, the mucocutaneous junctions, the elbows, and the trunk.
Biopsy reveals abrupt foci of full-thickness epidermal necrosis and ulceration overlying
wedge-shaped zones of dermal necrosis.v 326 There is a multicentric, angiodestructive,
lymphohistiocytic proliferation. A polymorphous lymphohistiocytic infiltrate invades blood
vessel walls in the deep dermis and panniculus (Fig. 20-121), resulting in ischemic
necrosis. Atypical large lymphocytes with pale cytoplasm and mitotic figures increase in
number during the course of the disease. Successful therapy has not been reported.
PSEUDOLYMPHOMA

Pseudolymphomas are a heterogeneous group of benign reactive T or B cell lymphoproliferative processes of diverse causes that simulate cutaneous lymphomas clinically or histo-

FIGURE 20-1 18. Pagetoid reticulosis in a dog. Neoplastic lymphocytes exhibit extreme folliculotropism.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1341

FIGURE 20-119. Pagetoid reticulosis in a dog. Close-up of Figure 20-118.

logically, or both. 335 • 336 In humans, pseudolymphomas have been associated with reactions
to sunlight, drugs (especially anticonvulsants), arthropods, viruses, foreign material (especially tattoo ink), and contactants, as well as with idiopathy.
Pseudolymphomas usually present as plaques or nodules, usually solitary, often erythematous, and occasionally ulcerated. Age, breed, sex, and site predilections are not clear
in small animals. Animals with pseudolymphoma, regardless of the number of skin lesions
or regional lymph node involvement, are typically otherwise healthy. Pseudolymphomas
have been recognized in dogs and cats in association with arthropod (especially tick) bites,
vaccinations, and drugs. 5 A case of pseudolymphoma resembling pseudo-Hodgkin's disease
was reported in a dog. 335 The dog had multiple, widespread, discrete, firm nodules and
plaques that were alopecic and red-purple (Fig. 20-122). Biopsy revealed a nodular to
diffuse dermal and subcutaneous proliferation of pleomorphic and atypical lymphohistiocytic cells with numerous Reed-Sternberg cells (large cells with a multilobulated nucleus
whose morphology is such that nuclear lobes appear to be "kissing," or "mirror images")
(Fig. 20-123A and B). The disorder spontaneously resolved.
Histopathologically, the distinction between malignant lymphoma and pseudolymphoma of the skin is one of the most difficult problems in dermatopathology.P" The

FIGURE 20-120. Lymphomatoid
granulomatosis. Crateriform ulcers
on ventral abdomen and medial
thigh. (Courtesy W. Rosenkrantz.)

1342 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-121. Canine lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Pleomorphic lymphohistiocytic cells infiltrating a deep dermal vessel.
(Courtesy E. Walder.)

cellular infiltrate is usually bandlike, nodular, or diffuse, and is composed predominantly
of lymphocytes. There is variable epitheliotropism, and usually little or no cellular atypia.
However, some lesions may show marked cellular atypia.335 • 336 Major points of differentiation between lymphoma and pseudolymphoma are presented in Table 20-7.
Treatment of pseudolymphoma is best directed at the underlying cause. Surgical
excision of solitary lesions is usually curative.
CUTANEOUS PLASMACYTOMA
• Cause and Pathogenesis. Cutaneous plasmacytomas (cutaneous extramedullary
plasmacytomas) are common in the dog and extremely rare in the cat." These neo-

'See references 1, 2, 5, 367, 368, 371-374.

FIGURE 20-122. Pseudolymphoma in a dog. Multiple nodules
on pinna.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1343

FIGURE 20-123. Pseudolymphoma in a dog. A, Pleomorphic,
atypical lymphohistiocytic cells with
numerous mitoses. B, Close-up of A.
Reed-Sternberg-like cell with "kissing" nuclei (arrow) .

• Table 20- i

HISTOLOGIC CRITERIA FOR THE
DIFFERENTIATION OF MALIGNANT LYMPHOMA
FROM PSEUDOLYMPHOMA

MALIGNANT LYMPHOMA

PSEUDOLYMPHOMA

Cellular infiltrate greater in deep dermis ("bottom
heavy")
Monomorphous cellular infiltrate
Medium-sized or large lymphocytes usually predominate
Germinal centers rare
Polychrome (tingtble body) macrophages rare
Necrosis en masse may be present
Epithelial and vascular structures often involved
Cytologic atypia common
Monoclonal immunocytologic pattern

Cellular infiltrate greater in superficial dermis ("top
heavy")
Polymorphous (mixed cell) infiltrate
Small lymphocytes usually predominate
Germinal centers common
Polychrome (ttngible body) macrophages common
No necrosis en masse
Epithelial and vascular structures spared
Cytologic atypia rare
Polyclonal immunocytologic pattern

1344 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-124. Canine plasmacytoma. Ulcerated nodule on digital pad. (Courtesy C. Foil.)

plasms are of plasma cell origin and are rarely associated with multiple myeloma. The
cause of cutaneous plasmacytomas is unknown. Because canine plasmacytomas occur
frequently in areas associated with chronic immune cell stimulation (e.g., gingiva in
association with periodontal disease, pinna in association with otitis extema, chin and paws
in association with chronic allergic dermatitis), it has been hypothesized that these neoplasms may arise due to chronic, prolonged B cell recruitment and cytokine stimulation.F"
It is likely that these neoplasms were previously reported as reticulum cell sarcoma,
atypical histiocytoma, lymphoma, or neuroendocrine tumor.
• Clinical Findings. Cutaneous plasmacytomas occur in dogs at an average age of
10 years, there is no sex predilection, and Cocker spaniels may be predisposed." They
are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the digits (Fig. 20-124), the lips, the
chin, and the ears (especially in the external ear canal) (see Figs. 20-110G and 20-125).
Most plasmacytomas are well circumscribed, raised, smooth, firm to soft, pink to red,
dermal in location, and 1 to 2 cm in diameter (range, 0.2 to 10 em). Tumors in the ear
canal are often polypoid, and those on digits are often ulcerated and hemorrhagic. Dogs
with multiple cutaneous lesions are rarely seen.f 367
Plasmacytomas are extremely rare in cats, being reported on the leg, lip, and gingiva
of aged animals. 369, 372
'See references 1, 2, 5, 367, 368, 371, 374.

FIGURE 20-125. Canine plasmacytoma. Purplish nodule on muzzle.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1345

FIGURE 20-126. Canine plasmacytoma. Cytologic examination
of aspirate shows pleomorphic
plasma cells. (Courtesy T. French.)

• Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals sheets of variably differentiated plasma
cells (Fig. 20-126). Histologically, plasmacytomas are characterized by sheets, packets,
and cords of cells infiltrating the dermis and subcutis (Figs. 20-127 and 20_128).2,367,366,
371-374 The neoplastic cells may be well differentiated or extremely pleomorphic and
atypical. Amyloid is present in about 10% of lesions. I, 2, 375 Electron microscopy or immunohistochemical techniques may be required to confirm the plasma cell origin of the

FIGURE 20-127. Canine plasmacytoma. Diffuse infiltration of dermis.

1346 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20- I 28. Close-up of Figure 20-127. Cordlike proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical plasma cells.

neoplastic cells. Immunohistochemical studies have shown that most plasmacytomas are
positive for immunoglobulin G heavy chains and light chains. 308 . 367. 368, 372, 375-377 Plasmacytomas are positive for vimentin, and most stain with thioflavine T.5. 367, 377 In one study,
80% of the canine plasmacytomas were positive for CD79a. 377 In addition, CD3-positive T
cells and CD18-positive dendritic cells were scattered throughout the neoplasms.F? Attempts to correlate DNA aneuploidy and oncoprotein content with histopathologic appearance and biological behavior of canine plasmacytomas was fraught with false-positive and
false-negative results."? A histologic grading system and determination of proliferation rate
(immunohistochemical detection of Ki-67 antigen) were also found to be of minimal
prognostic value.F"
• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision. Local recurrence and metastasis are rare. 1, 7, 367, 368, 374 Some authors believe that plasmacytomas
containing amyloid are more likely to recur after surgery. 1 A histologic grading system was
of no benefit, because neoplasms exhibited benign biological behavior in spite of malignant histologic appearance. 1, 340. 341 Rarely, plasmacytomas may occur simultaneously with,
or precede (by weeks to months), the development of multiple myeloma.v 5, 374

Tumors of Histiocytic Origin
There are at least five defined histiocytic proliferative disorders that may involve the skin
of the dog.57, 337 These disorders can be a frustrating group of diseases because it can be
difficult to impossible to differentiate them from granulomatous, reactive inflammatory
disorders or from lymphoproliferative diseases in regular paraffin sections. The clinical
presentation, behavior, and responsiveness to therapy vary tremendously between the
syndromes. Histiocytomas usually occur as solitary lesions in younger dogs, and they
spontaneously regress, Cutaneous histiocytosis presents with solitary or multiple lesions,
which tend to wax and wane. Most cases respond to immunomodulatory therapy, and
some may eventually spontaneously regress. Systemic histiocytosis is especially common in
Bemese Mountain dogs, and it is a slowly progressive disease that requires continuous
immunomodulatory therapy. Malignant histiocytosis, especially common in Bemese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, and Golden retrievers, is a multicentric, rapidly progressive disease
that responds poorly to treatment. Histiocytic sarcoma is a recently reported disorder-

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1347

especially common in Bernese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, Golden retrievers, and Flatcoated retrievers-which requires early radical excision or amputation.
Extensive immunophenotyping has shown that these disorders are all proliferations of
dendritic antigen-presenting cells.57. 337 In all of these disorders, the proliferating cell is
CDla, b, c, CDllc; CDI8; CD45; and MHC II positive.P However, histiocytomas lack
expression of CD4 and CD90 (Thy-I), which distinguishes them from cutaneous histiocytosis and systemic histiocytosis. 57. 337 Similarly, malignant histiocytosis and histiocytic sarcoma are CD4 and Thy-l negative.
It has been suggested that cutaneous histiocytosis and systemic histiocytosis not be
considered to be separate entities but rather be considered to be within the spectrum of
reactive Langerhans' cell htsttocytosis." However, breed predilections for the two syndromes are different, and immunophenotypically these disorders appear to represent a
proliferation of the perivascular dermal dendritic antigen-presenting cells.P? In the same
way, it has been suggested that malignant histiocytosis and histiocytic sarcoma are within a
spectrum of malignant Langerhans' cell histiocytosis, and that these two entities could be
referred to as "disseminated and localized malignant histiocytosis."57 More recently, it has
been suggested that these two disorders be referred to as "localized histiocytic sarcoma"
and "disseminated histiocytic sarcoma."337 Because the breeds at risk for the two syndromes are identical, this seems reasonable.
Histiocytoma

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Histiocytomas are common benign neoplasms of the
dog. I, 2. 5-7. 27 There are rare anecdotal reports of histiocytomas in the cat. 13. 14, 26 Their
cause is unknown, although they are more likely a unique proliferation or reactive hyperplasia rather than a true neoplasm. Immunohistochemical and electron microscopic studies
have shown that the proliferating cell is the Langerhans' cell. 337. 340, 342 It has been
suggested that the canine cutaneous histiocytoma might best be called an epidermotropic
Langerhans' cell histiocytosis. 57,342
• Clinical Findings. Characteristically, histiocytomas affect young dogs, with about
50% of cases occurring in dogs younger than 2 years.': 2, 5-7 However, old dogs may also
be affected. Boxers, Dachshunds, Cocker spaniels, Great Danes, Scottish terriers, Boston
terriers, American Staffordshire terriers, Rottweilers, Shar peis, West Highland white
terriers, Doberman pinschers, Labrador retrievers, miniature Schnauzers, English Springer
spaniels, and Shetland sheepdogs are predisposed. There is no sex predilection. Histiocytomas are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the head, the pinnae, and the
limbs (Fig. 20-129A; also see Fig. 20-110H and 20-130). They are usually small (less
than 3 em in diameter), firm, dome or button shaped, well circumscribed, dermal in
location, and frequently ulcerated. Histiocytomas are fast growing but benign. Most of the
rare reports of alleged generalized histiocytomas in older dogs were not confirmed ultrastructurally or immunohistochemically and probably represented histiocytic lymphosarcoma,
cutaneous histiocytosis, or pseudolymphoma.f 3, 10 Rarely, cases of multiple histiocytomas,
even with regional lymph node involvement, have been documented.P"- 342 This may be
more common in Shar peis. 57, 337 It is possible that inappropriate systemic glucocorticoid
therapy potentiated some of these.
• Diagnosis. Cytologic examination reveals sheets of pleomorphic "histiocytes" (Langerhans' cells) with variable numbers of lymphocytes and neutrophils, depending on the
stage of growth or involution (Fig. 20-131), Histopathologically, histiocytomas are characterized by uniform sheets and cords of pleomorphic histiocytic cells infiltrating the
dermis and subcutis, and displacing the collagen fibers and adnexae (Figs. 20-132 and
20-133).1. 2, 33 A characteristic feature of this neoplasm is a high mitotic index. The
overlying epidermis is typically hyperplastic, with prominent rete ridges and subjacent
dermal edema. Epithelial invasion is frequent, and intraepithelial nests of Langerhans'
cells resemble the Pautrier's microabscesses of epitheliotropic lymphoma.f" 342 In fact,
solitary or multiple histiocytomas in an older dog are a diagnostic dilemma, because the
distinction from epitheliotropic lymphoma is often impossible histologically.f" 337, 342 In

FIGURE 20-129. A, Canine histiocytoma. Ulcerated nodule on a pinna. B, Malignant histiocytosis. Multiple
red-purple macules, papules, and nodules over shoulder and neck (area has been clipped). C, Canine systemic
histiocytosis. Multiple erythematous papules, nodules, and plaques over the trunk (the area has been clipped).
D, Same dog as in C. Infiltration, erythema, and depigmentation of the nose. E, Canine cutaneous histiocytosis.
Multiple violaceous nodules over the lateral thorax (the area has been clipped). F, Cutaneous histiocytosis.
Multiple red papules, nodules, and plaques on both pinnae. G, Canine malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Nodules
on the bridge of the nose. H, Canine melanocytoma. Melanotic nodule on the lower eyelid.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1349

FIGURE 20-130. Ulcerated canine cutaneous histiocytoma on toe.

such cases, immunophenotyping is indispensable. Lymphocytic infiltration (CD8-positive
cytotoxic T cells) and areas of necrosis develop in regressing neoplasms. Histiocytomas are
CD la, b, c: CDlla, c, CDI8; CD45; ICAM-I; and MHC II positive.337-342 Histiocytomas
lack expression of CD4 and CD90 (Thy-I), which are consistently expressed in cutaneous
and systemic histiocytosis.57 Up regulation of expression of VLA-4, CDllb, CD44, and
CD54 (ICAM-I) is observed in most histiocytomas." In addition, they are often vimentin
positive, occasionally lysozyme positive, and usually S-lOO negative. 34o
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of histiocytomas may include surgical
excision, cryosurgery, electrosurgery, and observation without treatment.v ? The majority
of these neoplasms undergo spontaneous regression within 3 months. Even cases with
multiple skin lesions and regional lymph node involvement undergo spontaneous resolution, although some lesions regress as new ones appear over a course of, perhaps, several
months.f" 342 Lesions that are causing problems (pruritus, ulceration, and secondary infec-

FIGURE 20-131. Canine histiocytoma. Aspirate of skin nodules
shows numerous pleomorphic Langerhans' cells ("histiocytes"). (Courtesy J. Blue.)

1350 • Neoplastic and Non-NeoplasticTumors

FIGURE 20-132. Canine histiocytoma. Diffuse infiltration of Langerhans' cells ("histiocytes") with edema of superficial dermis and hyperplasia of overlying epidermis.

tion), but are in areas where surgical excision is difficult, respond dramatically to the
topical administration of a glucocorticoid in dimethyl sulfoxide.
Malignant Histiocytosis

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Malignant histiocytosis (disseminated histiocytic sarcoma) is a rare, malignant neoplasm of Langerhans' cell origin in dogs." The cause of the
neoplasm is unknown.
• Clinical Findings. Malignant histiocytosis has been recognized in several breeds of
dogs with no sex predilection; typically, older animals are affected. This neoplasm has also
been reported in closely related Bemese Mountain dogs, predominantly male dogs. 353
Other breeds that appear to be predisposed include the Rottweiler, Golden retriever,
Labrador retriever, and Flat-coated retriever.57.337 Spleen, liver, lymph nodes, and lungs
are most commonly involved. Cutaneous lesions are uncommon and are characterized by
multiple, firm, dermal to subcutaneous nodules (Fig. 20-129B) or plaques anywhere on
the body. Lesions mayor may not be alopecic, erythematous, or ulcerated. Typical clinical
signs of malignant histiocytosis include lethargy, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia. The course is rapidly progressive and invariably fatal.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, malignant histiocytosis is characterized by nodular
to diffuse, deep dermal and subcutaneous infiltration, with cytologically atypical histiocytic
cells exhibiting cytophagocytosis and high mitotic index (Fig. 20-134).1. 351-356 The neoplastic cells may be in dense proliferations of pleomorphic, individualized round cells,
more densely packed bundles of plump spindle cells, or both. 337 Large round or stellate
multinucleated giant cells are common. Neoplastic cells are positive for CD1, CD llc,
ICAM-l, and MHC 11.57 Unlike the cells, cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis, the cells of
malignant histiocytosis are not CD4 and CD90 (Thy-L) positive.f" 337 The neoplastic
cells of malignant histiocytosis are also positive for lysozyme, aI-antitrypsin, and cathepsin
B.5, 351, 353

'See references 1, 5, 20, 57, 337, 351-356,

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1351

FIGURE 20-133. Close-up of Figure 20-132. Proliferation of pleomorphic, hyperchromatic Langerhans' cells ("histiocytes") .

• Clinical Management. At present, there is no effective treatment. The disease
usually progresses rapidly to death or euthanasia.
Histiocytic Sarcoma

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Histiocytic sarcoma ("localized histiocytic sarcoma") is a
rare, malignant neoplasm of Langerhans' cell origin in dogs. 20..57 The cause of the neoplasm is unknown.

FIGURE 20-134. Canine malignant histiocytosis. Atypical "histiocytes" exhibiting erythrophagocytosis.

1352 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

• Clinical Findings. Histiocytic sarcoma has been recognized in several breeds, and
Bernese Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, Golden retrievers, Labrador retrievers, and Flatcoated retrievers appear to be predisposed.P: 57, 337 It is seen in adult to aged animals with
no sex predilection. Lesions are solitary or multiple, rapidly growing, dermal to subcutaneous nodules, and most occur around joints (especially elbow and stifle). Lesions may
extend circumferentially around a joint, or actually infiltrate the joint, and involve tendons
and muscles. Metastasis to regional lymph nodes has been documented in a few cases late
in the course of the disease.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, histiocytic sarcoma is characterized by a dermal and
subcutaneous proliferation of spindle cells forming bundles and whorls, large round cells
arranged in sheets and arrows, individual pleomorphic round cells, or mixtures of these
types. 20 Mitotic index ranges from 1 to 5/HPF. Multinucleated neoplastic giant cells are
frequent. The neoplastic cells are CDla, b, c; CDllc; CDI8; ICAM-l; and MHC II
positive.r" 57, 337 Unlike the cells of cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis, the cells of
histiocytic sarcoma are not CD4 and CD90 (Thy-I) positive.f": 337
• Clinical Management. Histiocytic sarcomas have been cured by early surgical
excision.P' often requiring amputation of the entire extremity.P? Advanced cases have a
poor prognosis, with no successful therapy reported.
Systemic Histiocytosis

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Systemic histiocytosis is a proliferative disorder of perivascular dermal dendritic antigen-presenting cells of dogs. l . 57, 346, 348-350 The cause of the
condition is unknown. It is thought to represent a "reactive histiocytosis."337
• Clinical Findings. Systemic histiocytosis occurs most commonly in closely related
Bernese Mountain dogs of 2 to 8 years of age, with male dogs predominating.P'" 348. 349
Although an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance had been proposed.r" an analysis of
127 cases ruled out autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, and sex-linked modes of
inheritance, and implicated a polygenic mode of inheritance.P" In the Bernese Mountain
dog, multiple cases can occur within the same litter, multiple cases can be produced by
the same dams or sires, and there is a higher frequency in the offspring of affected
parents compared with the offspring of normal parents that have produced the disease.r'"
The disorder has rarely been recognized in other breeds of dogs. 347, 350
Clinical signs vary with the severity of the disease and include anorexia; weight loss;
respiratory stertor; marked conjunctivitis, episcleritis, and chemosis; peripheral lymphadenopathy; and multiple cutaneous or subcutaneous papules, plaques, and nodules over the
entire body, especially the muzzle, the nasal planum, the eyelids, the dorsum, the flanks,
and the scrotum (see Figs. 20-129C and D).57, 345, 346, 348-350 The surface of the lesions
may appear normal to erythematous to ulcerated, and the lesions may be asymptomatic or
painful. The course is often prolonged and fluctuating, with alternating episodes of exacerbation and remission, or rapidly progressive and fatal. Ultimately, most dogs die or are
euthanized and show histiocytic infiltration of multiple organ systems, especially lung,
liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, systemic histiocytosis is characterized by predominantly deep perivascular, nodular, or diffuse dermal and subcutaneous infiltrations
of cytologically normal histiocytic cells (Fig. 20-135)." Variable populations of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils are present. Histiocytic cells frequently invade vascular
walls, which may produce thrombosis and ischemic necrosis. The tumor cells express
CDla, b, c, CDllc; ICAM-l; and MHC IIP, 337, 347 They also express CD4 and CD90
(Thy-I), which differentiates them from the cells in malignant histiocytosis, histiocytic
sarcoma, and histiocytoma.57, 337 Enzyme histochemical studies revealed that the cells were
also positive for acid phosphatase, nonspecific esterase, and lysozyme.f- 346
• Clinical Management. In general, treatment with large doses of glucocorticoids

"See references 1, 2, 337, 345, 346, 349, 350.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1353

FIGURE 20-135. Canine systemic histiocytosis. Proliferation of normal-appearing "histioeytes" and occasional lymphocytes.

and cytotoxic drugs has been generally ineffective.f? Early cases with less severe disease
may occasionally respond. 57. 349 A preliminary report indicated that treatment with bovine
thymosin fraction 5 may be beneflcial.P" but a subsequent report indicated that responses
were very inconsistent.57 Anecdotal reports suggest that cyclosporine and leflunomide are
effective.f" 337 Ocular lesions tend to be more difficult to treat and often require the
application of cyclosporine-containing ophthalmic drops.P?
Cutaneous Histiocytosis

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Cutaneous histiocytosis is a benign proliferation of perivascular dermal dendritic antigen-presenting cells of dogs." The cause of the disorder
is unknown. It is thought to represent a "reactive histiocytosis."337
• Clinical Findings. Cutaneous histiocytosis occurs in dogs, with no apparent age or
sex predilections. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs may be predisposed.v 5. 57 Lesions occur
as multiple, erythematous, dermal or subcutaneous plaques or nodules, I to 5 cm in
diameter, anywhere on the body (see Figs. 20-129E and F). The lesions may occur in
localized clusters or in a more generalized distribution. Some dogs have lesions limited to
the nasal planum and nasal mucosa, producing a "clown nose" appearance.s Lesions often
wax and wane and appear in new sites. 338a Systemic involvement and lymphadenopathy are
not reported.
• Diagnosis. Histopathologically, cutaneous histiocytosis is characterized by nodular
to diffuse, predominantly deep dermal or subcutaneous infiltrations of cytologically normal
histiocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils (Fig. 20-136A).1. 2. 5. 337 Involvement of the
superficial dermis is inconsistent, epidermotropism is not usually seen, but folliculotropism
may be present (see Fig. 20-136B) and vessel wall invasion is not prominent/" The
overlying epidermis usually lacks the prominent hyperplasia and rete ridge formation seen
with histiocytoma. The histiocytic cells express CDla, b, c; CDllc; ICAM-I; and MHC
11.57, 337 They also express CD4 and CD90 (Thy-L), which differentiates them from the
cells in malignant histiocytosis, histiocytic sarcoma, and histiocytoma.57, 337 Enzyme histochemical studies showed that the cells were positive for nonspecific esterase.P"
'See references 1, 2, 57, 338, 341, 343, 344.

1354 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-136. Cutaneous histiocytosis. A, Histiocytic cells have virtually replaced the dermis and subcutis,
but the overlying epidermis is unreactive. B, Close-up of A. Follicular epithelium is invaded by histiocytic
(arrow) and lymphocytic cells.

• Clinical Management. Treatment with large doses of glucocorticoids and with or
without cytotoxic drugs usually produces remission. However, recurrences are common.s"
57, 338a, 344 One dog had a temporary response to the intraperitoneal injection of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-modified t-asparaginase.F" One of the authors (DWS) has successfully
treated one dog with tetracycline and niacinamide. Spontaneous regression may OCCUr. 337
Benign Fibrous Histiocytoma

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Benign fibrous histiocytomas are rare tumors of dogs
and cats.v 5. 16. 3057, 358 The cause of benign fibrous histiocytomas is unknown. These tumors
may be reactive proliferations rather than true neoplasms.v v"
• Clinical Findings. Fibrous histiocytomas occur most commonly in dogs 2 to 4
years of age, with no sex predilection. Collies and Golden retrievers appear to be predisposed.v " Cutaneous benign fibrous histiocytomas occur as solitary or multiple nodules and
occur most commonly on the face, the legs, and the scrotum (Fig. 20-137). They are
usually firm, well circumscribed, 0.5 to 7 em in diameter, and dermal in location (Fig. 20138). The overlying skin may be normal or alopecic. Histologically identical lesions occur
in the cornea, with or without concurrent skin lesions (Fig. 20-139).358 These neoplasms
are benign.
• Diagnosis. Histologically, fibrous histiocytomas are characterized by poorly circumscribed cellular infiltrate permeated by a swirling stroma. The majority of cells are histiocytes and fibroblasts (Fig, 20_140),2.05,358 Collagen formation is minimal. Lymphoid cells
and plasma cells are commonly present, especially at the periphery of the masses.
• Clinical Management. Clinical management of fibrous histiocytomas may include
surgical excision and the administration of glucocorticoids. 2. 05, 358 Sublesional injections of

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1355

FIGURE 20-137. Canine benign fibrous histiocytoma. Multiple papules and nodules on
the lower lip of a collie.

10 to 40 mg of methylprednisolone may be effective for single lesions. Multiple lesions
are best treated with prednisolone or prednisone, 2 to 4 mglkg orally once daily until they
have completely regressed (1 to 2 weeks). Recurrent lesions may necessitate long-term
alternate-day steroid therapy. Some cases are initially unresponsive to, or become refractory to, systemic glucocorticoids. Azathioprine, 2 mg/kg orally every 48 hours, is usually
effective in these cases.5 . 357
Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Malignant fibrous histiocytomas (extraskeletal giant cell
tumors, giant cell tumors of soft parts, or dermatofibrosarcomas) are uncommon (in cats)

FIGURE 20-138. Canine benign fibrous
histiocytoma. Nodule on the paw of a
collie.

1356 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-139. Canine benign fibrous histiocytoma.
sclera of a collie.

Nodule

on

the

to rare (in dogs) malignant neoplasms." These neoplasms are believed to arise from
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells. The cause of malignant fibrous histiocytomas is unknown. Malignant fibrous histiocytomas have occurred experimentally after radiotherapy.P"
Cytogenic analysis of four feline malignant fibrous histiocytomas revealed variable karyotypic changes and frequent nonrandom involvement of chromosome El.180, 362
Some consider malignant fibrous histiocytoma not to be a single entity but rather a
"grab-bag" diagnosis that includes pleomorphic forms of several soft tissue sarcomas.s''? In

'See references 1, 2, 5, 7, 16, 27, 30, 361-366.

FIGURE 20-140. Canine benign fibrous histiocytoma. Proliferation of histiocytic and
fibroblastic cells with intermingling lymphocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1357

FIGURE 20-141. Feline malignant fibrous histiocytoma. Large,
ulcerated mass originating in the
periorbital region.

one study, histologically pure malignant fibrous histiocytoma, malignant histiocytosis, and
hybrid lesions (diagnostic criteria for both present in same mass) were studied.P" Age,
breed, and lesion distribution data were remarkably similar. The authors offered two
hypotheses: (1) these tumors are derived from the same undifferentiated precursor cell
that differentiates toward one tumor type or the other with overlapping phenotypes; or (2)
these tumors are derived from different cell types, at least one of which can differentiate
toward the phenotype of the other.
• Clinical Findings. Malignant fibrous histiocytomas occur in older cats and dogs,
with no apparent breed or sex predilection. In one report,364 a 4-month-old puppy was
affected. They are usually solitary, firm, poorly circumscribed, variable in size and shape,
and dermal and subcutaneous in location (Fig. 20-141; also see Fig. 20-129F). There is a
predilection for the leg (especially the paw) and the shoulder." These neoplasms are
locally invasive (to muscle and bone). Early reports indicated that these tumors were slow
to metastasize, but 9 of 10 dogs in a recent report developed metastasis, usually widespread.P" The mean survival after diagnosis in these 10 dogs was 61 days.
• Diagnosis. Histologically, malignant fibrous histiocytomas are characterized by an
infiltrative mass composed of varying mixtures of pleomorphic histiocytes, fibroblasts, and
multinucleate tumor giant cells (Figs. 20-142A and B).l. 2, 361, 363. 365. 366 Mitotic figures and
a storiform ("cartwheel") arrangement of fibroblasts and histiocytes are common features.
Recognized histologic subtypes include giant cell type, storiform-pleomorphic type, and
dermatofibrosarcoma type. 2, 366 Malignant fibrous histiocytomas are positive for vimentin,
lysozyme, and arantichymotrypsin.47, 363, 365 In a recent report of seven cats, the tumors
stained variably with cytokeratin, vimentin, desmin, and S_100.363

• Clinical Management. The therapy of choice for malignant fibrous histiocytomas
is radical surgical excision or amputation. Recurrence after surgical excision is common.
Metastasis appears to be more common than Originally reported. 1, 2. 5, 366

• MELANOCYTIC NEOPLASMS
The nomenclature for melanocytic tumors is complex and confusing, with terms such as
melanoma, malignant melanoma, melanosarcoma, melanocytoma, benign melanoma, mel-

"See references 1, 2, 27, 30, 361, 363, 365, 366.

1358 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-142. Feline malignant librous histiocytoma. A, Cytologic examination of aspirate reveals
multinucleated neoplastic giant cell.
B, Proliferation of atypical librohistiocytic cells and numerous atypical
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells
(arrow).

anocytic nevus, acquired nevus, and congenital nevus having uncertain meaning in certain
contexts. The so-called nevus cell, which makes up the pigmented nevi of humans, is now
known to be a melanocyte with slight histopathologic and biochemical alterations. On this
basis, it has been suggested that all noncongenital, benign proliferations of melanocytes be
designated melanocytoma.v 5 The term melanoma is used in this text as synonymous with
a malignant proliferation of melanocytes. In dogs, most cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms
(about 70%) are benign, whereas benign and malignant neoplasms occur with about equal
frequency in cats." Melanocytic neoplasms are the second most common tumor of the
canine digit.28
Melanoeytic neoplasms are relatively common (in dogs) to uncommon (in cats) benign
or malignant neoplasms arising from melanocytes and melanoblasts.l- 2. 4-7 The cause of

'See references 11, 14, 26, 35, 381, 384, 385, 388.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1359
these neoplasms usually is unknown. In cats, melanomas have been produced with injections of FeSV,5, 6 In humans, there is a correlation between exposure to ultraviolet light
and the development of melanoma." Chronic exposure to insecticides may also be a risk
factor in humans. 381a Canine melanomas can be transplanted to neonatal dogs (after
treatment with antilymphocyte serum) and to nude mice." The tumor-suppressor substances p21/Waf-l and p-53 were undetectable in the tumor cells from a canine multicentric melanoma.P" Melanoma developed within a congenital giant melanocytic nevus in a
dog. 390b In a study of melanomas from two cats, monosomy D4 was found in both, along
with a variable complex profile of further alterations: monosomy E3, elongated chromosome F2, deleted chromosome Bl, and chromosome Al fusions. 387b
Breed predilections in dogs suggest that melanocytic neoplasms could have a genetic
basis. 388a Alterations in expression or function of genes and proteins involved in cell cycle
control and apoptosis may be of paramount importance in the development of melanoma. 388a
In general, over 85% of melanocytic neoplasms in dogs arising from haired skin are
benign, whereas about 33% of those arising from the claw bed are malignant." In addition,
over 75% of the melanocytic neoplasms in Doberman pinschers and miniature Schnauzers
are benign, whereas 85% of those in miniature Poodles are malignant. 7

Melanocytoma
CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog
Melanocytomas occur in dogs at an average age of 9 years, with no sex predilection.
Breeds reported to be at risk include Scottish terriers, Airedales, Boston terriers, Cocker
spaniels, Springer spaniels, Boxers, Golden retrievers, Irish setters, Irish terriers, miniature
Schnauzers, Doberman pinschers, Chihuahuas, and Chow Chows. 1, 2, 5-7, 381, 434 Doberman
pinschers and Irish setters develop multiple melanocytomas.'- 386 Lesions are usually solitary and occur most frequently on the head (especially the eyelid and the muzzle) (see
Fig. 20-129H), the trunk, and the paws (especially interdigitally).': 2, 381, 434 They are
usually well circumscribed, firm to fleshy, brown to black, 0.5 to 5 em in diameter, and
alopecic; they vary from dome shaped to pedunculated to papillomatous in appearance.

Cat
Melanocytomas occur in cats at an average age of 10 years, with no sex or breed
predilection.1, 2, 5-7, 3B2, 385, 388 Lesions are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the
head (especially the pinna and the nose) and the neck'!, 2, 5-7, 385, 388 They are usually well
circumscribed, firm to fleshy, brown to black, 0.5 to 4 em in diameter, and alopecic, and
vary from dome shaped to pedunculated to papillomatous in appearance.

DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, melanocytomas are characterized by melanocytes in sheets, packets
(nests and theques), and cords (Figs. 20-143 and 20_144).1,2.33,388,434 The melanocytes
may be predominantly epithelioid, spindle cell, or a combination of these two forms.
Histologic subtypes include junctional, compound, and dermal.v 5 Rarely, the melanocytic
proliferation is distinctly perifollicular (pilar neurocristic melanocytoma) (Fig. 20 _145).378
Melanocytomas are positive for vimentin.v 16, 47, 49, 59

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The therapy of choice is radical surgical excision.v" Up to 10% of the dogs with histologically benign melanocytomas die of their disease (usually euthanasia performed for recurrence, metastasis, or both).5, 380, 381, 384 Regrettably, no clinical features reliably distinguish
benign from malignant melanocytic proliferations.P" 434

1360 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-143. Feline melanocytoma. Proliferation of spindIeshaped melanocytes.

FIGURE 20-144. Feline melanocytoma. Multiple theques of epithelioid melanocytes.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1361

FIGURE 20-145. Pilar neurocristic melanocytoma.
Neoplastic melanocytes surround and involve hair follicle.

Melanoma

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Dog

Melanomas occur in dogs at an average age of 9 years, with no sex predilection. Breeds
reported to be at risk include those listed previously for melanocytoma.'- 2, 4-7, 434 Miniature and standard Schnauzers, Scottish terriers, and Irish setters are at risk for developing
subungual melanomas.P" Lesions are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the
head (Fig. 20-146), the limbs, the digits (including the claw bed) (Fig. 20-147), the

FIGURE 20-146. Melanoma on the lip of a dog.

1362 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-147. Digital melanoma. Note resemblance to melanotic fibroma in Figure 20-52B.

scrotum, the lip, and the trunk. 1, 2.4-7. 381. 434 They are variably circumscribed (well to
poor), shaped (dome, plaque, and polypoid), and colored (gray, brown, and black) and
range from 0.5 to 10 em in diameter. Ulceration is common.

Cat
Melanomas occur in cats at an average age of 10 to 11 years, with no sex or breed
predilection. 1, 2, 4-7. 14.385,388,391 Lesions are usually solitary and occur most commonly on the
head (especially the pinna, the eyelid, and the lip) and the neck (Fig. 20_148).1,2,4-7,388
They are Variably circumscribed and shaped (dome, plaque, and polypoid), and most are
brown to black (Fig. 20-149) and val)' from 0.5 to 5 em in diameter. Ulceration is
frequent.

DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, melanomas are characterized by atypical melanocytes in sheets, packets (nests and theques), and cords (Figs. 20-150 and 20_151).1,2,33,388,434 The melanocytes may be predominantly epithelioid, spindle cell, Or a combination of these two forms.
Rarely, the melanocytic proliferation may be distinctly perifollicular (pilar neurocristic

FIGURE 20-148. Melanoma on the ventral neck of a cat.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1363

FIGURE 20-149. Multiple melanomas on the thorax of a cat.

melanomai.F" Clear cell (balloon cell) melanomas have been described.v 383, 391 A recent
report recognized five histologic types of feline melanoma, which were, in decreasing
frequency: signet-ring, epithelioid, balloon-cell, mixed epithelioid or spindle, and spindle. 39 1 The signet-ring and balloon-cell types were often amelanotic, and were confirmed
by electron microscopy and in situ hybridization for tyrosine gene expression. Such lesions
were previously diagnosed as undifferentiated carcinomas, undifferentiated sarcomas, and
lymphomas. Melanomas are positive for vimentin and variably positive for S-100 protein
and neuron-specific enolase.v 47, 49, 58, 59, 391 The murine monoclonal antibody IBF9 reacts
with a high percentage of canine melanomas in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. 389 Seven monoclonal antibodies recognizing melanoma-associated antigens in human

FIGURE 20-150. Canine melanoma. Cytologic examination of aspirate reveals several melanocytes.

1364 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-151. Feline melanoma. Proliferation of atypical epithelioid melanocytes.

tissues were tested in canine melanomas, but only two (HMSA-1, HMSA-2) worked.F"
Although the two antibodies recognized about 83% of the canine melanomas, they also
stained about 29% of canine neoplasms of nonmelanocytic origin.
Malignancy of canine and feline melanocytic neoplasms was not related to the predominant cell type or tumor size, nor the intensity of PCNA expresston.P'" However,
Ki67 expression significantly correlated with histologic prognostic factors (malignancy,
invasive growth) and patient survival.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The therapy of choice is radical surgical excision.v ? Recurrence after surgery and metastasis are common.1, 5-7. 381, 384 In one large study of surgically treated cutaneous melanomas
in dogs, animals had a median survival time of 12 months and a death rate of 54% within
2 years if their neoplasm was small, and a median survival time of 4 months and a death
rate of 100% within 2 years if their neoplasm was large. 381 In one study,28 32% of the
dogs with digital melanomas already had metastases at the time of diagnosis. The mean
survival time of dogs with surgically treated oral melanomas was 3 months.P" The average
survival time following surgical excision of feline cutaneous melanomas was 4.5 months.'?'
Modalities such as intralesional cisplatin implants, liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine, IL-2 and TNF-a, intralesional granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, and various autologous tumor vaccines have given disappointing
results.387a, 388a Regrettably, no clinical findings reliably distinguish melanomas from melanocytomas.'- 388, 434 Histologic findings of high mitotic activity and marked cellular atypia
may correlate with more aggressive biological behavior in canine melanomas- 380, 381 and
feline melanomas, 1, 388 One study in cats indicated that epithelioid cell- type neoplasms
were more likely to be malignant, whereas a second study failed to confirm this finding
but suggested that lymphoplasmacytic inflammation indicated malignancy.P" A third study
indicated that there was no correlation between the degree of cellular pleomorphism,
mitotic index, and extent of local infiltration in feline melanomas.vLarge tumor size (> 2 em"), high mitotic index, aneuploidy, and distant metastasis are
useful prognostic indicators for canine melanoma.P" 387, 388a

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1365

• MISCELLANEOUS CUTANEOUS NEOPLASMS

Transmissible Venereal Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
The transmissible venereal tumor (infectious sarcoma, contagious venereal tumor, venereal
granuloma, canine condyloma, transmissible lymphosarcoma, transmissible reticulum cell
tumor, histiocytoma, or sticker tumor) is an uncommon benign to malignant neoplasm of
the dog. I , 5-7, 405 Immunohistochemical studies support a histiocytic origin. 400,401 Transmissible venereal tumor is considered a naturally occurring allograft, with transmission occurring by transplantation of viable neoplastic cells to a susceptible host. 5, 405, 406 The tumor
cells contain 59 chromosomes, and only 42 or 43/59 are acrocentric (normally 76n8),
whereas 16 or 17 are metacentric (2178 normallyr'!" as compared with the normal canine
complement of 78. A viral origin has been investigated but not verified. The neoplasm is
usually transmitted by coitus, but may be inoculated into multiple sites by licking, biting,
and scratching. Transmission may be accomplished by subcutaneous, intravenous, and
intraperitoneal injections and by skin or mucosal scarification (incubation period, about 3
weeks). Transmissible venereal tumor has a worldwide distribution, but is more prevalent
in tropical and subtropical urban areas. It is enzootic in the southeast United States,
southeastern Europe, Central and South America, Japan, the Far East, the Middle East,
and parts of Africa. 396a. 405
Transmissible venereal tumor can grow for extended periods in an immunocompetent
allogeneic host." 405 During progressive growth of the tumor, cell-mediated immune responses to tumor cells are impaired, and serum antibodies are present that, when incubated with tumor cells, can block complement-mediated lysis of tumor cells by serum
antibodies from dogs with regressing transmissible venereal tumors. Circulating immune
complexes have been detected in dogs with transmissible venereal tumor, but the pathogenetic significance of this finding is unknown. Anti-tumor IgG antibodies have been
detected in the sera of adult dogs with progressing, regressing, and metastatic tumors. 396a
Dogs experimentally rechallenged with transmissible venereal tumor cells mount a rapid T
lymphocyte response, resulting in rapid tumor regression." 405 T cells, B cells, and plasma
cells participate in an effective immune response against transmissible venereal tumor and
mediate spontaneous tumor regression.s?' The expression of MHC II by neoplastic cells is
also associated with an effective immune response and tumor regression. 404 Immunosuppression results in increased tumor growth rate and malignancy.396a
Some investigators report that transmissible venereal tumors are usually benign in
male dogs but that metastasis to regional lymph nodes is common in intact female dogs,
suggesting that these tumors may be hormone dependent.e'" Ovariectomy was reported to
produce a rapid reduction in size of transmissible venereal tumors in bitches.r" Other
authors indicate that males are more susceptible to metastatic disease. 396a

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Transmissible venereal tumor occurs in sexually active dogs (average 4 to 5 years old) and
shows no apparent breed or sex predilection.S 405 Dogs at the highest risk are those living
in areas with high concentrations of free-roaming dogs, inadequately enforced leash laws,
and poorly controlled breeding. Neonatal animals and those with poor health or immunosuppression for various reasons may be more likely to have rapid tumor growth and
metastatic lesions." 405 Neoplasms occur commonly on the external genitalia (penis and
vagina) (Figs. 20-152A and 20-153) and the skin (especially the face and the limbs) (Fig.
20-154), and may be Single or multiple, nodular, pedunculated, multilobular or cauliflower-like, firm or friable, 1 to 20 em in diameter, and dermoepidermal to subcutaneous
in location, and they may frequently be ulcerated. Early signs of genital lesions include
discharge, often hemorrhagic, with excessive licking of the area. Genital lesions are often
pale to bright red, fragile, and commonly hemorrhagic, and with time necrotic, ulcerative,

1366 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-152. A, Transmissible venereal tumor in a dog. Friable, hemorrhagic nodule on the penis. B,
Metastatic pharyngeal carcinoma in a dog. Purpuric plaques on the neck. C, Metastatic mammary adenocarcinoma
in a dog. D, Metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma in a dog. Erythematous papules and plaques in the groin. E,
Metastatic bronchiogenic carcinoma in a cat. Ulcerative paronychial lesions. F, Multiple follicular cysts in a cat. G,
Multiple follicular cysts (milia) in the groin of a dog. H, Epitrichial sweat gland cyst on the neck of a cat.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1367

FIGURE 20-153. Transmissible
venereal tumor of the vagina and
vulva.

and secondarily infected. Some dogs have concurrent thrombocytopenia and prolonged
dotting and bleeding times. 407a
In experimental or laboratory dogs, these tumors frequently regress spontaneously. In
one experimental dog colony, the neoplasm was transmitted through 40 generations,
consisting of 564 dogs.5 • 405 Neoplasms developed in 68% of the dogs and spontaneously
regressed permanently in 87% of these dogs within 180 days. However, there is no such
evidence of general benignity in the naturally occurring disease. Spontaneous regression in

FIGURE 20-154. Transmissible venereal tumor in a dog. Subcutaneous nodule near the elbow.

1368 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

naturally occurring cases of transmissible venereal tumor is rare, and many instances of
metastasis and extragenital occurrence have been reported.f 396., 405
DIAGNOSIS
Cytologic evaluation reveals round cells with 1 or 2 nucleoli, moderate amounts of pale
blue cytoplasm, and multiple small, distinct, clear intracytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig, 20155).405 Histopathologically, transmissible venereal tumor is characterized by compact
masses or sheets of uniform round to polyhedral neoplastic cells, often growing in rows in
a delicate stroma (Fig. 20-156).1. 2, 5, 33, 405 Mitoses are plentiful. Tumors undergoing
spontaneous regression display necrosis, increasing numbers of infiltrating leukocytes (especially lymphocytes), and increasing numbers of collagen bundles. Transmissible venereal
tumors are positive for vimentin and negative for cytokeratin.P 400, 401 Tumor cells are also
positive for lysozyme, neuronal-specific enolase, and ACMl (mononuclear phagocytic system).4oo,401
CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Transmissible venereal tumor rarely regresses spontaneously, and metastasis (regional
lymph nodes, skin, central nervous system, and anywhere) occurs in up to 17% of the
cases. Both radiotherapy and surgical excision have been successful, although recurrence
after surgery is common (33% to 68% of cases).4-7, 405, 406 It is difficult to obtain wide
surgical margins, and tumor transplantation into the surgical wound by instruments and
gloves may be important in postsurgical tumor recurrence. Chemotherapy is very effective.5, 405, 406 More than 90% of the dogs treated with vincristine (0.025 mglkg intravenously, once weekly for an average of 4 to 6 weeks) were cured, including those with
metastases.v 396, 396a, 397, 405, 407 AgNOR measurements correlated with response to vincristine 399 as well as with malignancy and prognosis. 406• Vincristine-resistant transmissible
venereal tumors respond to radiotherapy.t?" Doxorubicin administered at a dosage of 0.5
mg/m 2 of body surface area (BSA) intravenously once weekly for an average of 6 weeks is
also reported to be effective." 405 Vinblastine (0.15 mglkg intravenously, once weekly) is
also effective.t'" Single-drug chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide or methotrexate was
not effective.P" 405 Immunoadsorption of immune complexes with protein A, autogenous
vaccine, levamisole, and intralesional bacille Calmette-Cuerin vaccine are all of unproven

FIGURE 20-155. Transmissible
venereal tumor. Aspirate of skin
nodule shows monomorphous population of large round cells with
vacuolated cytoplasm. (Courtesy T.
French.)

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1369

FIGURE 20-156. Transmissible venereal tumor. Sheets of neoplastic mononuclear cells
with vesicular nuclei.

beneflt'- 403, 405 In one dog, a suspension of lymphokine-activated killer cells injected
intralesionally, weekly for three treatments, caused tumor regression.P" Transmissible
venereal tumor is highly antigenic, and tumor regression is followed by transplantation
immunity.f 405 However, the immunity is not long term, and second transmissions can
occur 2 or more years later. 396a

Primary Cutaneous Neuroendocrine Tumor
CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are rare neoplasms of dogs." 392-395 The cause
of these tumors is unknown. The cell of origin may be the Merkel cell, which, like this
neoplasm, shows dual epithelial and neural differentiatlon.f 51, 393 These neoplasms have
probably been previously called "atypical histiocytomas," "lymphomas," "solid basal cell
tumors," and "undifferentiated sarcomas."

CLINICAL FINDINGS
In dogs, the vast majority of primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors have been
reported to be malignant and metastatic.P- or benign with rare recurrence after surgery.393,395 Most dogs are older than 8 years of age, and most have solitary lesions (Fig.
20-157), especially on the lips, the ears, or the digits. The tumors are usually rapid
growing, are 0.5 to 2.5 ern in diameter, and may be ulcerated. Neuroendocrine tumors
may also occur in the oral cavity of dogs. 395

DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors are characterized by sheets,
solid nests, or anastomosing trabeculae of uniformly round tumor cells with abundant
amphophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic and vesicular nuclei, and frequent mitoses (Fig.
20_158).2,392-395 Giant and multinucleate tumor cells may be seen. Electron microscopic
examination reveals characteristic cytoplasmic dense-core membrane-bound granules and a
perinuclear whorl of intermediate filaments (Fig. 20-159). The characteristic cytoplasmic

1370 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-157. Merkel cell tumor in a dog. Alopecic, ulcerated
nodule between eyes. (Courtesy M.
Nagata.)

neurosecretory granules are often lost in formalin-fixed tissues. Immunohistochemical
studies have shown that the primary cutaneous neuroendocrine tumors contain cytokeratin
and chromogranin A.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
Clinical management of these tumors is best accomplished with early radical surgical
excision. The vast majority of dogs appear to be cured after surgery.

FIGURE 20- 158. Canine neuroendocrine tumor. Infiltrate consisting of round tumor cells and
frequent mitoses.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1371

FIGURE 20-159. Merkel's cell. N, nucleus of a Merkel's cell; asterisk indicates basal lamina; M,
mitochondria; arrows indicate specific granules of the Merkel's cell; D with pointer, desmosome
between the Merkel cell and a keratinocyte (K); C, collagen with cross-striation (x 20,000). Inset:
specific membrane-bound granules at higher magnification (x 75,000). (From Lever WF, Schaumburg-Lever G: Histopathology of the Skin, 7th ed. J.B. Lippincott Co, Philadelphia, 1990, p 863.)

Epithelioid Sarcoma

CAUSE AND PATHOGENESIS
Epithelioid sarcoma is an extremely rare malignant neoplasm of dogs and cats that is
probably epithelial in origin. 16 • 36. 51, 408 The cause of this tumor is unknown.

1372 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-160. Feline epithelioid sarcoma. Two nodules in
the axillary region.

CLINICAL FINDINGS
Epithelioid sarcoma has been recognized in adult cats and dogs. l6, 36, 408 Lesions are
solitary and occur on the limbs (Fig. 20-160). They begin as firm, poorly circumscribed,
dermal or subcutaneous nodules that may ulcerate as they enlarge. Metastasis may occur.

DIAGNOSIS
Histopathologically, epithelioid sarcomas are characterized by a nodular arrangement of
plump spindle cells and large, round to polygonal epithelioid cells (Fig. 20_161).36,408

FIGURE 20-161. Feline epithelioid sarcoma. Multifocal area of necrosis within a neoplasm.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1373

FIGURE 20-162. Close-up of Figure 20-161. Proliferation of pleomorphic, atypical epithelioid cells.

Mitoses are frequent, and necrosis is characteristically present, especially in the center of
large nodules (Fig. 20-162). In one dog, tumor cells were positive for vimentin and,
focally, for desmin.v"

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT
The therapy of choice is early radical surgical excision.

• SECONDARY SKIN NEOPLASMS
Secondary skin neoplasms result from the metastasis of primary neoplasms in other organs
to the skin. Patterns of metastasis may be due to specific tropisms of cells in the primary
neoplasm, as well as hemodynamic, immunologic, biochemical, or microenvironmental
factors. Theoretical mechanisms for preferential metastasis include site-specific production
of local growth factors, microvascular endothelial cellular adhesion molecules, and soluble
chemotactic agents that facilitate migration, adherence, and invasion of neoplastic cells
into particular target organs. Secondary skin neoplasms are rare in dogs and cats. Circumscribed, solid, subcutaneous nodules were recognized on the heads of cats with metastatic
mammary adenocarcinoma and gastric carctnoma.v t'" Multiple purpuric papules, plaques,
and nodules of the neck have been seen in dogs with metastatic pharyngeal carcinomas
(see Fig. 20-152B).5 Visceral hemangiosarcomas may metastasize to the skin as dermal or
subcutaneous papules and nodules, which may be bluish to reddish to blackish in color.v?
A sternal liposarcoma metastasized to the skin of the front limb as papules.v" Oral
melanomas may metastasize to the skin of the muzzle and lips.417 Nodular to ulcerative to
edematous (pseudocellulitis, inflammatory carcinoma) lesions have been recognized in the
ventral abdominal, inguinal, and medial thigh skin of dogs and cats with metastatic
mammary adenocarcinoma (see Fig. 20-152C)5, 417, 419, 420 and colonic adenocarcinoma
(Fig. 20-163; also see Fig. 20-152D).5, 414, 417 Nodules in the umbilical skin have been
recognized in dogs and cats with metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, jejunal

1374 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-163. Metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma in a dog. Lymphatic metastasis in
skin.

adenocarcinoma, and teratoma."! A seminoma metastasized to the skin of the jaw and
trunk in a dog. 4 18a The authors have seen solitary or multiple metastatic cutaneous nodules
(Fig. 20-164) in dogs with prostatic carcinoma.
Ulcerative, destructive lesions on the digits have been seen in aged cats with asymptomatic bronchiogenic or squamous cell carcinomas of the lung (Fig. 20-165; also see Fig.
20-152E).131. 412. 415 417. 418 Usually, multiple digits of multiple paws are involved, but
occasionally multiple digits on one paw or one digit only are affected. Occasionally, lesions
may also be present at other cutaneous sites: head, abdomen, lip, thigh, lumbar area.
Leukemia cutis is a dissemination of aggressive systemic leukemia to the skin. Cutaneous lesions seen with leukemia may be specific (leukemic infiltrates presenting as macules,
papules, plaques, nodules, purpura, and ulcers) or nonspecific (infectious dermatoses,
urticaria, erythema multiforme, exfoliative dermatitis, and pruritus). In dogs, leukemia
cutis (patchy alopecia, erythema, and papules of the trunk) was reported with chronic
lymphocytic leukernia.v? Nonspecific skin lesions of leukemia (recurrent bacterial pyo-

FIGURE 20-164. Cutaneous metastases from prostatic carcinoma.
Multiple ulcerated nodules over withers.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1375

FIGURE 20-165. Metastatic bronchiogenic carcinoma in a cat. Metastatic lesions in dermis.

derma) were reported in 9% of a series of dogs with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.v"
Histopathologically, leukemia cutis is characterized by a perivascular, interstitial, lichenoid,
or diffuse monomorphous infiltration of leukemia cells." The leukemia cells often infiltrate
between collagen bundles.
Surgical transplantation of a neoplasm (tumor seeding) is rarely reported in dogs or
cats. 409 • 413 Lesions appear in the healed surgical incision through which the primary
neoplasm was removed. Most cases involved urinary tract carcinomas.

• PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Certain dermatoses may occasionally be associated with concurrent neoplasms.v- 420a, 420b
Such dermatologic conditions include amyloidosis, pruritus, necrolytic migratory erythema,
exfoliative dermatitis, pemphigus, vasculitis, dermatomyositis, and collagenous nevi. Pruritus of the distal limbs was seen in a cat with oral squamous cell carcinoma.P Pruritus
disappeared when the neoplasm was excised, and it returned when the neoplasm recurred.

• NON-NEOPLASTIC TUMORS

Cutaneous Cysts
A cyst is a non-neoplastic, simple saclike structure with an epithelial lining, Classification
of cysts depends on identification of the lining epithelium or the pre-existing structure
from which the cyst arose.

FOLLICULAR CYSTS
The majority of cutaneous cysts in the dog and cat are follicular in ongm and can be
further categorized by the level of the follicle from which they develop. I. 2, 5 Infundibular
and isthmus-catagen (tricholemmal) cysts are common in dogs and uncommon in cats.
Matrical cysts are uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. Hybrid cysts, which combine two
or three types of follicular epithelium, are uncommon in dogs and cats.
Follicular cysts usually appear as solitary, well-circumscribed, round, smooth, firm to

1376 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

fluctuant lesions that are dermal to subcutaneous in location and 0.5 to 5 ern in diameter.! 2. 5. I42a Occasional lesions may have a bluish hue. Lesions may open and discharge a
yellowish, brownish, or grayish material that is caseous or doughy in consistency. There
are no apparent age or sex predilections for solitary follicular cysts, and they occur most
commonly on the head, the neck, the trunk (see Fig. 20-152F), and the proximal limbs.
Lesions may be multiple (Fig. 20-166).,5. I42a, 427 Boxers, Doberman pinschers, Shih tzus,
and miniature Schnauzers may be predisposed. I Rarely, follicular cysts appear as recurrent
soft tissue swellings in the medial canthus of the eye.422
Multiple follicular cysts of presumed congenital origin occur on the dorsal midline of
the head in young dogs and on pressure points (especially the elbow) of dogs, presumably
resulting from chronic trauma, dermal fibrosis, and obstruction of follicular ostia." Small (2
to 5 mm in diameter) follicular cysts (milia) may be seen as postinflammatory changes,
especially in dogs," They are usually white and grossly resemble pustules or calcinosis cutis
(Fig. 20-167; also see Fig. 20-152G). Multiple milia can also be seen in dogs that have
received therapeutic levels of glucocorticoids for long periods.
All types of cysts may be complicated by rupture and resultant foreign body granuloma reaction and secondary bacterial infection. Such cysts often appear inflamed and
infected grossly, and may be painful, pruritic, or both.
The therapy of choice for most cutaneous cysts is surgical excision or observation
without treatment. Cysts should never be squeezed hard or manually evacuated, because
such procedures greatly increase the chance of expressing cyst contents into the dermis or
subcutis and inciting foreign body reaction and infection.
Infundibular Cyst

Infundibular cysts have been previously called "epidermoid" or "epidermal inclusion" cysts
by pathologists and "sebaceous cysts" or "wens" by clinicians.v 5, 424 They are characterized

FIGURE 20-166. Multiple follicular cysts over back
of dog (area has been clipped). (Courtesy E. Teixeira.)

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1377

FIGURE 20-167. Canine follicular cyst (milium).

by a cyst wall that undergoes epidermal differentiation; a cyst cavity containing lamellar,
often concentrically arranged keratin (Fig. 20-168); and often a connection to a rudimentary hair follicle if serial sections are employed.v " Cytologic examination of any keratinfilled cyst reveals squames (Fig. 20-169A) and cholesterol crystals (Fig. 20-169B).

Isthmus-Catagen Cyst
Isthmus-catagen (tricholemmal) cysts are characterized by a cyst wall that undergoes
trichilemmal differentiation (no granular layer) and a cyst cavity containing a more homogeneous, amorphous keratin (Fig. 20_170).2,430

FIGURE 20-168. Canine infundibular cyst.

1378 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-169. Canine follicular cyst. A, Aspirate contains numerous squames. B, Aspirate contains
cholesterol crystals.

Matrical Cyst

Matrical cysts are characterized by a cyst wall of deeply basophilic, basaloid cells, which
abruptly keratinize to form eosinophilic, amorphous keratin replete with ghost, or shadow,
cells.t

Hybrid Cyst
Hybrid (mixed, or panfollicular) cysts are characterized by two or three types of follicular
differentiation in the same lesion (Fig. 20_171).2.431

DERMOID CYST
Dermoid cysts are rarely observed in dogs and cats." They are developmental anomalies and are often congenital and hereditary. Dermoid cysts are most commonly reported
in Boxers, Kerry blue terriers, and Rhodesian ridgebacks. In Rhodesian ridgebacks and
their crosses, the condition (dermoid sinus, or pilonidal sinus) is thought to be inherited
as a Simple recessive trait (see Chap. 12).2,5.423,426.428

'See references 1, 2, 5, 423, 426, 428, 429, 432.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1379

FIGURE 20-170. Canine isthmus-catagen (trichilemmal) cyst.
Note trichilemmal differentiation
of the cyst wall.

Lesions may be solitary or multiple and often occur along the dorsal midline. Dermoid cysts occurred in the flank region of two cats. 429 Histopathologically, the lesions are
characterized by a cyst wall that undergoes epidermal differentiation and contains welldeveloped small hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and occasionally epitrichial sweat
glands. 2 , 5

EPITRICHIAL (APOCRINE) SWEAT GLAND CYST
Epitrichial cysts are common in dogs and rare in cats.': 2.5 There are no apparent breed or
sex predilections, and affected animals are usually 6 years of age or older, They may be
the result of sweat gland duct obstruction. Lesions are usually solitary, well-circumscribed,
smooth, tense to fluctuant swellings, which are 0.5 to 3 em in diameter. The overlying

FIGURE 20-171. Canine hybrid cyst, Note combined epidermal (left) and trichilemmal (right)
differentiation of the cyst wall,

1380 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-172. Legend on opposite page

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1381

FIGURE 20-173. Canine epitrichial sweat gland cyst.

skin may be atrophic and alopecic, and the lesions often appear bluish (see Fig. 20152H). Cyst contents are usually clear, watery, and acellular. Lesions occur most commonly on the head, the neck, and the limbs. I. 5
Multiple epitrichial cysts occur in the eyelids of Persian and Himalayan cats. 420c Cysts
ranged from 2 to 10 mm in size and were soft, smooth, round, and fluid filled. They were
located in the skin around the medial canthus and in the upper and lower eyelids. The
cysts involved both eyelids in most cats.
Epitrichial sweat gland cystomatosis is a term used to describe a rare condition in
middle-aged-to-older dogs. 2. 5. 433 Multiple clusters of cystically dilated epitrichial sweat
glands produce grouped vesicles and bullae, 0.5 to 5 em in diameter, especially on the
head and the neck (Fig. 20-172A). The overlying skin is usually atrophic and alopecic,
and the cysts may have a bluish to purplish tint.
Cytologic examination of aspirates reveals only fluid and a few macrophages.v" Histopathologically, epitrichial sweat gland cysts are made up of variable-sized dilated epitrichial
sweat glands (Figs. 20-173 and 20-174), which may occur as large solitary cysts, clusters
of smaller cysts, or large cysts surrounded by smaller satellite cysts (Fig. 20_175).1.2,5.433
The treatment of choice for epitrichial cysts is surgical excision or observation without
treatment. Solitary lesions may be aspirated, but often recur within several weeks. There
is at present no practical approach to the dog with epitrichial sweat gland cystomatosis.

SEBACEOUS GLAND CYST
Cysts that involve sebaceous structures are extremely rare in dogs and cats.> Sebaceous
duct cysts appear as solitary, firm, dermal nodules that are smaller than 1 ern in diameter.
There are no known age, breed, sex, or site predilections.

FIGURE 20-172. A, Multiple epitrichial sweat gland cysts in a dog. B, Solitary collagenous nevus in a Brittany spaniel.
Firm, well-circumscribed, partially pin-feathered nodule over the thorax. C, Multiple collagenous nevi in a German
shepherd dog. D, Multiple collagenous nevi on the paw of a German shepherd dog. E, Two small, melanotic organoid nevi
in the perauricular area of a young cat. F, Congenital vascular nevus in the groin of a young dog. G, Congenital sebaceous
nevus in the Hank of a dog (the area has been clipped). H, Multiple hyperkeratotic, melanotic epidermal nevi in the Hank of
a young dog.

1382 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-174. Close-up of Figure 20-173. Columnar glandular epithelium with apical
budding.

BRANCHIAL CYST

Branchial cysts are developmental defects arising from the second branchial cleft. They
are extremely rare in dogs and cats. I. 421. 425 There are no apparent age, breed, or sex
predilections. Affected animals have a poorly circumscribed, firm to fluctuant swelling in
the ventral cervical region. Histopathologically, branchial cysts are characterized by a thinwalled cyst lined by pseudostratified, nonciliated, columnar epithelial cells. I The treatment
of choice is surgical excision or observation without therapy.

Nevi
A nevus (hamartoma) is a circumscribed developmental defect of the skin, characterized
by hyperplasia of one or more skin components. I. 2, 5, 447 They may or may not be
congenital and are uncommonly reported in dogs and cats. The mechanism of nevus
formation is not understood. A failure in the normal orderly embryonic inductive process
has been theorized. In addition, the distribution of certain epidermal and vascular nevi has
prompted speculation that a relationship to dermatomes or peripheral nerves exists. Finally, some nevi have a hereditary occurrence.
COLLAGENOUS NEVI

Collagenous nevi have been recognized in many breeds of dogs as solitary or multiple
cutaneous lesions, especially on the head, neck, and proximal extremities (see Fig. 20172B).2. 5, 439, 447 Most collagenous nevi are firm, well circumscribed, and 0.5 to 5 em in
diameter. Some lesions are alopecic, are hyperpigmented, and have pitted surfaces C'cobblestone" or "orange peel" appearance). Lesions on the feet may ulcerate and cause pain
and lameness.
In German shepherd dogs, a syndrome of multiple, approximately symmetrically
distributed collagenous nevi (so-called nodular dermatofibrosis) on the limbs (see Fig.
20-172C and D), head, neck, and ventral trunk has been described." In these German

'See references 2, 5, 435, 437, 438, 443, 445, 449.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1383

FIGURE 20-175. Epitrichial sweat gland cystomatosis in a dog. Multiple, large, dilated epitrichial sweat
glands.

shepherd dogs, the syndrome is autosomal dominant in inheritance and is characterized by
the sudden onset of skin lesions at 3 to 7 years of age. There is no sex predilection. The
lesions are distributed more or less symmetrically on the limbs and head, and range from
0.5 to 5 em in diameter. They are usually firm, asymptomatic, and covered by normal skin
and hair. These German shepherds virtually always develop bilateral renal disease, varying
from polycystic kidneys to renal cystadenomas to renal cystadenocarcinomas. Enlarged and
abnormally shaped kidneys may eventually be palpable in about 60% of the dogs and may
be detected radiographically or ultrasonographically in about 86%.443 The dogs usually
develop clinical signs of renal dysfunction within 3 to 5 years after the initial recognition
of the skin lesions Intact females almost always develop multiple uterine leiomyomas.w'
Many of the dogs have multiple small intestinal polyps, which are asymptomatlo.w' Death
is due to renal failure, metastasis (sternal and abdominal lymph nodes, liver, lungs), and
euthanasia.v"
Multiple collagenous nevi in association with bilateral renal cysts, cystadenomas, and
cystadenocarcinomas have occasionally been recognized in other dog breeds: Golden retrievers, Boxers, German shepherd crosses, and mongrels. 441. 443 a, 451 Periodic abdominal
radiographs or ultrasound examinations, or both, have been recommended for all dogs
with multiple collagenous nevi.451
The renal pathology associated with multiple collagenous nevi has been described as
non-neoplastic cysts, hyperplastic and dysplastic nodules, adenomas, adenocarcinomas, and
oncocytoma.F" 438, 443. 445. 449. 451 This diversity of pathologic changes probably represents
different stages of the same process.
The pathogenesis of the multiple collagenous nevi and bilateral renal disease syndrome is not known. One hypothesis is that the skin lesions may represent a paraneoplastic process wherein collagen is stimulated by growth factors (TGFa and B?) produced by
the renal tumors.w- 443, 451 Another hypothesis is that the skin, renal, and uterine lesions
develop independently through a common genetic abnormality.v'! 443, 4,51

1384 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

A syndrome of regional collagenous nevi has been reported.r" Adult dogs develop
nodular lesions on a limb or the face that increase in number and spread to involve a
large area of the limb, neck, and sternum.
Histopathologically, collagenous nevi are characterized by nodular areas of collagenous
hyperplasia, which often displace adnexae and subcutaneous fat (Figs. 20-176 and 20177). In clinical management, surgical excision or observation without therapy is usually
employed. Chemotherapy (prednisone, azathioprine) has not been effective.

ORGANOID NEVI
Organoid nevi are uncommonly reported in dogs and cats. 35 , 444 Lesions are solitary,
occasionally multiple, firm to mushy, 0.3 to 3 em in diameter, and dome shaped to
pedunculated. They occur primarily on the face, the head (see Fig. 20-172E), and the
proximal extremities. Linear organoid nevus occurred in a l-week-old Old English sheepdog as linear, yellowish, crusty lesions on the head, neck, shoulders, and dorsolateral
thorax.w' and in a 3-month-old Standard Schnauzer as linear, hyperkeratotic, hyperpigmented lesions on the head, neck, trunk, ears, and limbs. 446a
Focal adnexal dysplasia and adnexal nevi have been described in dogs. l , 2, 450 These
two conditions may or may not be identical. Adnexal nevi are usually not inflamed, and
the hyperplastic adnexae maintain a more-or-less normal anatomic orientation (Fig. 20178A). Focal adnexal dysplasias are usually inflamed, fibrosed, and the hyperplastic adnexae are arranged in bizarre configurations (Fig. 20-178B). Lesions are solitary, firm,
well circumscribed, and dome shaped to polypoid, and range from 1 to more than 4 cm in
diameter. Larger lesions are frequently alopecic and ulcerated. The distal limbs (especially
pressure points and interdigital areas) are most commonly involved. Affected dogs are
generally middle aged or older, there is no sex predilection, and Doberman pinschers and
Labrador retrievers may be predisposed.' The histopathologic findings of so-called focal
adnexal dysplasia are similar to so-called folliculosebaceous hamartoma in humans, and the
lesion is perhaps best classified as a nevus at present. Similarly, adnexal nevi consist of
hyperplastic adnexae and fall under the category of organoid nevi.

FIGURE 20-176. Collagenous nevus. Exophytic, nodular hyperplasia of collagen.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1385

FIGURE 20-177. Close-up of Figure 20-176. Collagenous hyperplasia surrounding a hair
follicle.

FIGURE 20-178. A, Adnexal (pilosebaceous) nevus. Note the more-or-less normal anatomical configuration of the hyperplastic hair follicles and sebaceous glands. B, Focal adnexal dysplasia. The bizarrely arranged
central adnexae are surrounded by fibrosis and chronic inflammation.

1386 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

Histopathologically, organoid nevi are characterized by hyperplasia of two or more
skin components (Fig. 20-179). Focal adnexal dysplasia is characterized by circumscribed,
dermal to subcutaneous nodules composed of loosely distributed, haphazardly arranged
folhculosebaceous units and abundant collagen.v 450 Concurrent suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation is common. Adnexal nevi are composed of hyperplastic adnexae
with frequent concurrent inflammation.' Therapeutic options include surgical excision and
observation without treatment. Isotretinoin and etretinate were ineffective for the treatment of hnear organoid nevus in one dog.446a
VASCULAR NEVI

Vascular nevi occur on the scrotum (varicose tumors of the scrotum, or scrotal vascular
hamartoma) and occasionally elsewhere in dogs (see Fig. 20-172F).I, 2,33,452 They are
most common in dogs older than middle age and in breeds with pigmented skin, such as
Scottish terriers, Airedales, Kerry blue terriers, and Labrador retrievers. The lesions are
characterized by single or multiple, slowly enlarging and hyperpigmenting plaques on the
scrotum. Periodic hemorrhage from the lesions may be seen. Vascular nevi are occasionally seen at other cutaneous sites. 18, 446 Histopathologically, the scrotal lesions are characterized by cavernous dilatation (telangiectasia) of blood vessels and epidermal melanosis.
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. A 2-yearold Labrador retriever with a dark red patch ("port-wine stain") around its neck since
birth was cured with surgical excision and an axial rotation flap.448
SEBACEOUS GLAND NEVI

Sebaceous gland nevi are rarely diagnosed in dogs.I, 2, 447 They are usually solitary, alopecic, scaly plaques, smaller than 2 em in diameter, with an irregular or papillated surface. A
sebaceous gland nevus was recognized in a 1-year-old male Poodle.r'" The lesion had been
present on the lateral right thigh since birth and had been slowly enlarging. It was linear,
multinodular, alopecic, smooth, shiny, greasy, and orange-yellow (see Fig. 20-172G).

FIGURE 20-179. Organoid nevus, Dome-shaped mass consisting of an excess of hair
follicles and sebaceous glands. (From Scott OW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.)

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1387

FIGURE 20-180. Sebaceous nevus. Nodular sebaceous gland hyperplasia.

Histopathologically, sebaceous gland nevi are characterized by sebaceous gland hyperplasia
and overlying papillated epidermal hyperplasia (Fig. 20-180). Therapeutic options include
surgical excision and observation without treatment.

EPITRICHIAL (APOCRINE) SWEAT GLAND NEVI
Epitrichial sweat gland nevi are rarely diagnosed in young dogs and cats.'- 436 Lesions have
been solitary and located on the head and neck (Fig. 20-181). Lesions may be bluish in
color and fluctuant. Histologically, a linear to nodular proliferation of hyperplastic, dilated
epitrichial sweat glands is present in the deep dermis and subcutis (Fig. 20-182). Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment.

FIGURE 20-181. Epitrichial sweat gland nevus in a
cat. Multilobulated, alopecic, fluctuant masses on left
side of face. (Courtesy M. Paradis.)

1388 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-182. Epitrichial
sweat gland nevus in a cat. Hyperplastic, secretion-filled epitrichial
sweat glands.

EPIDERMAL NEVI

Epidermal nevi are uncommonly diagnosed in dogs. 1, 2, 5, 447 These lesions usually occur in
young adults. Lesions previously reported as lentigines or pigmented epidermal nevi in
Pugs and miniature Schnauzers were probably papillomas (see Papilloma). Lesions are
usually multiple, occasionally solitary, ovoid to circular to linear plaques, hyperpigmented,
scaly to papillomatous, and smaller than 2 em in diameter (Fig. 20-183). They occur most
commonly on the ventral abdomen (see Fig. 20-172H), the ventral thorax, and the medial
limbs. Epidermal nevi tend to follow Blashko's lines, possibly resulting from genetic
mosaicism in which two or more genetically different cell lines are present within the
same individual. 448a

FIGURE 20-183. Linear epidermal nevus in a dog. Hyperpigmented, inflamed, linear
lesion runs from sternum to medial elbow.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1389

Epidermal nevi occurred in a 2-month-old male miniature Schnauzer; the lesions
developed as wavy, linear bands of closely set, hyperpigmented, hyperkeratotic papules
and plaques over the trunk.v'? Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevi were reported in three related Cocker spaniels.v" All dogs were female and had lesions before 6
months of age. Linear, pigmented verrucous lesions were noted most commonly on the
lateral trunk, the footpads, and the ears. All lesions were moderately pruritic.
Histologic examination of epidermal nevi shows orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papillated epidermal hyperplasia, epidermal melanosis, and papillomatosis (Fig. 20-184). In
some instances, granular degeneration of the epidermis is present.
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. In
three dogs with inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevus, improvement was
achieved with the oral administration of isotretinoin or etretinate.v-'

HAIR FOLLICLE NEVI
Hair follicle nevi are uncommonly diagnosed in dogs. 1. 2, 444 Lesions are solitary or multiple, hyperkeratotic, ovoid or linear plaques, especially on proximal extremities. Hairs
arising from the lesions may be thick and brushlike. Histologically, hair follicles and hair
shafts that are larger than normal are present in clusters (Fig. 20-185). Therapeutic
options include surgical excision and observation without treatment.

COMEDO NEVI
Comedo nevi are rarely diagnosed in dogs. 444 iLesions are solitary, well-circumscribed,
annular areas of alopecia, hyperkeratosis, and clustered comedones. Schnauzer comedo
syndrome is probably a more widespread form of comedo nevus (see Chap. 12). Histologically, there are clusters of dilated, hyperkeratotic hair follicles (Fig. 20-186).
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment. The
oral administration of isotretinoin is effective treatment for the Schnauzer comedo syndrome (see Chap. 12).

FIGURE 20-184. Epidermal nevus. Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, papillated epidermal
hyperplasia, and papillomatosis.

1390 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-185. Hair follicle nevus from a dog.

PACINIAN CORPUSCLE NEVI
Pacinian corpuscle nevi are rarely reported in dogs and cats'! Numerous pacinian corpuscles are seen in the dermis and subcutis.

MELANOCYTIC NEVI
Although the term "melanoeytic nevus" has been frequently employed in veterinary medicine,2. 5. 33, 434, 440 most of the lesions were acquired and more appropriately called melanocytomas (see Melanocytic Neoplasms). Congenital melanocytic nevi are occasionally seen
(Figs. 20-187 and 20-188A and B).
A Golden retriever was born with a strip of abnormal skin on the right pelvic limb. 390b
When examined at 5 years of age, the dog had a 5-cm-wide strip of abnormal skin that
extended from the medial stifle to the metatarsus. The hair in the lesion was a darker
color, and the skin was thickened with multiple dark papules and one 3.5 X 7 em nodule
that had recently arisen. Histopathologic findings included a melanocytic nevus with a
focal melanoma, which metastasized. This case was likened to congenital giant melanocytic
nevus in humans, wherein 12% of the lesions develop melanoma. Early surgical excision is
recommended.

Keratoses
Keratoses are firm, elevated, circumscribed areas of reactive keratinocyte proliferation and
excessive keratin production.v" Keratoses are uncommonly reported in dogs and cats.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1391

FIGURE 20-186. Comedo nevus in a dog.

ACTINIC KERATOSIS
Actinic (solar) keratoses occur in dogs and cats.v 5. 113. 455 They are caused by excessive
exposure to ultraviolet light and occur more commonly in sunny areas of the world.
Actinic keratoses may be single or multiple, appear in lightly haired and lightly pigmented

FIGURE 20-187. Melanocytic
nevus, present since birth, on the
rump of a hypothyroid dog.

1392 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-188. Melanocytic
nevus in a dog. A, Focal junctional
and dermal proliferation of melanocytes (compound melanocytic nevus). B, Close-up of A.

skin, and vary in appearance from ill-defined areas of erythema, hyperkeratosis, and
crusting to indurated, crusted, hyperkeratotic plaques varying from 0.3 to 5 em in diameter (Fig. 20-189A). Dalmatians, American Staffordshire terriers, beagles, Basset hounds,
and bull terriers have an increased incidence of actinic keratoses. Histopathologically, they
are characterized by atypia and dysplasia of the epidermis and superficial hair follicle
epithelium, hyperkeratosis (especially parakeratotic), and occasionally solar elastosis of the
underlying dermis (Fig. 20-190). Actinic keratoses are premalignant lesions that are
capable of becoming invasive squamous cell carcinomas. Early lesions regress with avoidance of sunlight and photoprotection. If pruritus or pain is prominent, topical or oral
glucocorticoids are beneficial. More advanced lesions require systemic retinoid (isotretinoin, etretinate, acitretin), cryosurgery, or surgical excision (see Solar Dermatitis, Squamous Cell Carcinomal.P: 89. 455
LICHENOID KERATOSIS

Lichenoid keratoses are rarely recognized in dogs.2 • 5. 454 Generally, solitary asymptomatic
lesions are seen most commonly on the pinnae and groin of adult dogs. Lesions are wellcircumscribed, erythematous, and scaly to markedly hyperkeratotic plaques or papillomas

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1393

FIGURE 20-189. A, Feline actinic keratosis. Two crusted plaques on a background of solar dermatitis. B,
Multiple melanotic lichenoid keratoses on the pinna of a miniature Schnauzer. C, Multiple brownish, greasy
seborrheic keratoses over the back of a dog. D, Cutaneous hom cranial to the vulva. E, Two cutaneous horns
on the pinna of a cat. F, Multiple cutaneous horns on the footpads of an Fe LV-infected cat. G, Calcinosis
circum scripta on the elbow of a dog. H, Calcinosis circumscripta on the tongue of a dog.

1394 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-190. Feline actinic keratosis. Epidermal dysplasia (carcinoma in situ) and
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis.

varying from 0.5 to 2 cm in diameter. Occasionally, multiple lesions are present on the
lateral surface of the pinna (see Fig. 20-189B).454 Histologically, an irregular to papillated
epidermal hyperplasia with overlying hyperkeratosis and an underlying subepidermal lichenoid band of inflammation are seen (Fig. 20-191A and B). Therapeutic options include
surgical excision or observation without treatment.

SEBORRHEIC KERATOSIS
Seborrheic keratoses are rarely recognized in dogS. 5 , 457 The cause of seborrheic keratoses
is unknown, and they have nothing to do with seborrhea. They may be Single or multiple
and have no apparent age, breed, sex, or site predilections. The lesions are elevated
plaques and nodules with a hyperkeratotic, often greasy surface (see Fig. 20-189C). They
are frequently hyperpigmented. Histologically, seborrheic keratoses are characterized by
hyperkeratosis, hyperplasia (basaloid and squamoid), and papillomatosis (Fig. 20-192).
Therapeutic options include surgical excision and observation without treatment.

PERIOCULAR KERATOSIS
The authors have occasionally consulted on older dogs with distinctly periocular keratoses.
The dogs were not disturbing the lesions, and usually had no other dermatologic disease.
The lesions were described as having developed gradually, more or less symmetrically.
Whitish to grayish, dry, keratinous fronds were presented on the periocular skin (Fig. 20193). No biopsies were permitted. No therapy was attempted.

CUTANEOUS HORN
Cutaneous horns are uncommon in dogs and cats." The cause of cutaneous horns may be
unknown, or they may originate from papillomas, basal cell tumors, squamous cell carcinomas, keratinous cysts, keratoacanthomas, or actinic keratoses. Cutaneous horns may be
single or multiple and have no apparent age, sex, or site predilections. They are firm,
hornlike projections of up to 5 ern in length (see Fig. 20-189D and E). Multiple

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1395

FIGURE 20-191. Canine idiopathic lichenoid keratosis. A, Papillated epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, and a
lichenoid cellular infiltrate. B, Close-up of A.

cutaneous horns have been seen on the footpads of cats with FeLV infection.v- 36. 456
Generally, multiple horns are seen on multiple footpads, and the horns may arise from
anywhere on the pad (see Fig. 20-189F). Occasionally, lesions are seen on the face.
Multiple cutaneous horns have also been described on the footpads of Fe LV-negative
cats. 458 In these cases, multiple pads were affected, but the horns arose exclusively under
the claws (Fig. 20-194).

FIGURE 20-192. Canine seborrheic keratosis. Papillated epidermal
hyperplasia and orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.

1396 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-193. Periocular keratosis in a dog.

Histopathologically, cutaneous horns are characterized by extensive, compact, laminated hyperkeratosis (Figs. 20-195 and 20-196). The base of a cutaneous hom must
always be inspected for the possible underlying cause. FeLV-associated cutaneous horns in
cats are characterized by parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, apoptosis, and multinucleate keratinocytic giant cells (Fig. 20-197).456 Multiple subungual cutaneous horns from FeLVnegative cats did not have these histopathologic findings. 458 Therapeutic options include
surgical excision and observation without treatment.

FIGURE 20- 194. Subungual
horns. Hornlike structures (arrow)
were present below numerous claws.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1397

FIGURE 20-195. Feline cutaneous hom. Hornlike projection of dense keratin arising
from hyperplastic, hypergranular, hyperkeratotic footpad epithelium.

FIGURE 20-196. Feline cutaneous hom. Hornlike
projection from the footpad of an FeLV-infected cat.

1398 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20- 197. Close-up of
Figure 20-196. Multinucleated
(syncytial) keratinocytes (arrow).

Calcinosis Cutis
Calcinosis cutis is an uncommon disorder of the dog. 2• 5 Calcification of the skin may
occur in a wide variety of unrelated disorders (Table 20-8). The complex biological
process whereby inorganic ions are deposited as a solid phase in soft tissues is not
understood. It is probable that the pathogenesis involves abnormally high mitochondrial
calcium phosphate levels, which result in crystal deposition and cell death. It begins as a
calcium phosphate nidus and progresses to hydroxyapatite crystal formation within a
collagen matrix.
Metastatic calcinosis cutis is rarely seen in dogs and cats, and all cases have occurred
in association with chronic renal disease.v 5. 463. 469. 474 Cutaneous lesions have been localized to the footpads and interdigital skin. Affected pads are enlarged, painful, and firm;
they are often ulcerated and discharge a chalky white, pasty to gritty material. Although

• Table 20-8

CAUSES OF CALCINOSIS CUTIS IN DOGS

Dystrophic calcification (deposition of calcium salts in injured, degenerating, or dead tissue)
Localized areas (calcinosis circumscripta)
Inflammatory lesions (tuberculosis, foreign body granuloma, demodicosis, staphylococcal pododermatitis)
Degenerative lesions (follicular cysts)
Neoplastic lesions (pilomatrixoma, others)
Widespread areas (calcinosis universalis)
Hyperglucocorticoidism (naturally occurring or iatrogenic)
Diabetes mellitus
Percutaneous penetration of calcium
Idiopathic calcification (deposition of calcium salts with no appreciable tissue damage or demonstrable metabolic
defect)
Localized areas (idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta of large breed dogs)
Widespread areas (idiopathic calcinosis universalis of young dogs)
Metastatic calcification (deposition of calcium salts associated with abnormal metabolism of calcium and phosphorus with demonstrable serum level changes)
Chronic renal disease

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1399
most animals with renal failure are older, metastatic calcinosis of the footpads has been
reported in younger dogs with renal dysplasia.v" One should consider chronic renal failure
in a dog of any age with calcinosis in multiple footpads. Skin biopsy findings are identical
to those reported for calcinosis circumscripta (see later). Although therapy has usually
been unsuccessful, the lesions in one cat completely resolved after 3 months of dietary
management (restricted protein and phosphorusl.v" Although footpad lesions usually indicate metastatic calcinosis and renal disease, calcinosis circumscripta has been reported to
affect one footpad of an otherwise healthy young German shepherd dog475 and a young
terrier mix,470 both metacarpal pads of a young Siberian husky,473 and the footpads of both
hind feet of a Dachshund.v" Surgical excision was curative in all cases.
Widespread calcinosis cutis has frequently been reported in dogs in association with
naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism (see Chap. 10). Cutaneous lesions
consist of papules, plaques, and nodules that are firm, often gritty, frequently ulcerated
and secondarily infected, and yellowish white to pinkish yellow. These lesions may occur
anywhere but are especially common along the dorsum and in the axillae and groin.
Histologically, calcium salts are deposited along collagen and elastin fibers in the dermis
and basement membrane zones and are frequently surrounded by a foreign body granuloma reaction. This form of calcinosis cutis in dogs is thought to be dystrophic in nature,
because blood calcium and phosphorus levels are invariably normal. Correcting the hyperglucocorticoidism causes this type of calcinosis cutis to regress within 2 to 12 months. A
syndrome of idiopathic calcinosis cutis that is grossly and histologically identical to glucocorticoid-associated calcinosis cutis has rarely been seen in healthy dogs younger than 1
year old. 2 , 5 The authors have recognized this syndrome in English bulldogs, Doberman
pinschers, Dachshunds, Labrador retrievers, and Rottweilers (Fig. 20-198A and B). Lesions spontaneously regress within 1 year. Calcinosis cutis in dogs was reported to result
from percutaneous penetration of calcium (contact with commercial hygroscopic landscaping products [see Chap. 16]). Spontaneous recovery followed avoidance of further contact
with the substances.

FIGURE 20-198. Idiopathic calcinosis cutis in a black Labrador retriever puppy. A, Multiple hard, white papules
with surrounding erythema in groin and medial thighs, Lesions spontaneously resolved, B, Massive dystrophic
mineralization of dermal collagen,

1400 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

CALCINOSIS CIRCUMSCRIPTA

• Cause and Pathogenesis. Calcinosis circum scripta (kalkgicht, calcium gout, apocrine cystic calcinosis, or multiloculated subcutaneous granuloma) is uncommon in dogs
and rare in cats.v 5. 461. 474 In most cases, the cause is unknown. Because lesions most
frequently occur over pressure points or sites of previous trauma, such as that incurred
during ear cropping, the calcium deposition may be dystrophic." The tendency for dystrophic mineralization may be enhanced by the active calcium metabolism of large, rapidly
growing dogs.2 Rarely, calcinosis circumscripta is reported to occur at the site of previous
subcutaneous injections.w- 466. 467 from degeneration of pre-existing epitrichial sweat gland
cysts.! at the sites of previous bite wounds," on the neck in association with choke
collars.v" or at the site of polydioxanone sutures. 464,471 Although most affected animals are
otherwise healthy, symmetric calcinosis circumscripta has been reported in dogs in association with hypertrophic osteodystrophy and idiopathic polyarthritis.f"
• Clinical Findings. Calcinosis circumscripta is seen most commonly in younger
dogs (younger than 2 years of age) of either sex.474 About 90% of all reported cases have
been in large breeds of dogs, and more than 50% of cases have been in German shepherd
dogs. Lesions are usually dome shaped, fluctuant or firm, and 0.5 to 7 em in diameter.
Initially, the overlying skin may be freely movable and covered with hair. As the lesions
progress, however, ulceration frequently occurs, as does the discharge of a chalky white,
pasty to gritty material. Lesions are usually single but occasionally multiple or bilaterally
symmetric. They are most frequently seen over or near pressure points and bony prominences, especially the lateral metatarsal and phalangeal areas of the pelvic limb and the
elbow (see Fig. 20-189G).474 They may also occur over the dorsal aspects of the fourth to
sixth cervical vertebrae-P or in the tongue (see Fig. 20-189H).474 Boxers and Boston
terriers appear to be predisposed to lesions at the base of the pinna and on the cheek,
respectively.t'": 462. 474 Postinjectional (especially medroxyprogesterone acetate) calcinosis
circumscripta is seen at injection sites, usually within 5 months of injection, and most
commonly in Poodles.v" 467 Choke chain-associated lesions occur on the neck,465 Polydioxanone suture-associated lesions occur at surgical incision sites, and all reported cases
have occurred in German shepherds.w- 471 Calcinosis circumscripta is extremely rare in
cats.429. 430

FIGURE 20-199. Canine calcinosis circum scripta. Nodular accumulations of mineral below the
level of epitrichial sweat glands.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 140 I

FIGURE 20-200. Canine calcinosis circumscripta.
Palisading
granuloma surrounding a mineral
deposit.

• Diagnosis. Histologically, calcinosis circumscripta is characterized by multifocal areas of granular amorphous material in the deep dermis and subcutis surrounded by a zone
of granulomatous inflammation and separated by fibrous trabeculae (Figs. 20-199 and
20_200).2,474 Cartilaginous and osseous metaplasia, as well as transepidermal elimination
of minerals, may be seen in some lesions. The amorphous masses are usually strongly
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) positive and Alcian blue positive. Radiographic examination
reveals mineralized soft tissues .
• Clinical Management. The treatment of choice is surgical excision. Recurrences
or the development of new lesions after surgery is not reported.f" Dogs with symmetric
lesions (on scapulae and hips) in association with hypertrophic osteodystrophy or idiopathic polyarthritis had spontaneous remission of their calcinosis circumscripta as the
associated disease became inactive.F"

FIGURE 20-20 I. Focal cutaneous mucinosis in a Shar pei. Alopecic, pin-feathered nodule near vulva.

1402 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors

FIGURE 20-202. Canine focal cutaneous mucinosis. Diffuse dermal mucinosis.

Cutaneous Mucinosis
Cutaneous mucinoses are a heterogeneous group of skin disorders characterized by the
excessive accumulation or deposition of mucin (acid mucopolysaccharide) in the dermis or
epithelial structures.v 4, 459 The mucinosis may be primary or secondary, or focal to diffuse,
In dogs, cutaneous mucinosis may be seen with hypothyroidism, acromegaly, lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, alopecia mucinosa, and mycosis fungoides and as a normal
finding in the Shar pei. In cats, cutaneous mucinosis may be seen with alopecia mucinosa
and mycosis fungoides.
Focal cutaneous mucinosis has rarely been reported in dogs. 459 Three dogs (two
Doberman pinschers, all three females, 3 to 6 years old) had solitary, asymptomatic, firm
and rubbery to soft nodules (1 to 3 em in diameter) on the head or the leg (Fig. 20-201).
The primary histopathologic finding was an accumulation of excessive mucin (Alcian blue
positive or colloidal iron positive) within the dermis or subcutis, which disrupted and
separated collagen fibers (Fig. 20-202). In addition, a mild to extensive proliferation of
fibroblasts and a mild lymphohistiocytic infiltrate were seen. Surgical excision was curative.

• References

General Textbook Sources
1. Goldschmidt MH, Shofer F: Skin Tumors of the Dog
and Cat. Pergamon Press, New York, 1992.
2. Gross TL, et al: Veterinary Dermatopathology. A
Macroscopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine
and Feline Skin Disease. Mosby-Year Book, St.
Louis, 1992.
2a. Cuaguere E, Prelaud P: A Practical Guide to Feline
Dermatology. Merial, Paris, 2000.
3. Moulton JE: Tumors in Domestic Animals III. University of California Press, Berkeley, 1990.
4. Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Managing the Veterinary
Cancer Patient: A Practice Manual. Veterinary Learning Systems, Trenton, New Jersey, 1995.
5. Scott OW, et al: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal

Dermatology, 5th ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995.
6. Theilen GH, Madewell, BR: Veterinary Cancer Medicine II. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1987.
7. Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG: Clinical Veterinary Oncology, 2nd ed. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1996.

Survey Articles and Chapters
8. Bastianello SS: A survey of neoplasia in domestic species over a 40-year period from 1935 to 1974 in the
Republic of South Africa. V. Tumours occurring in
the cat. Onderstepoort J Vet Res 50:105, 1983.
9. Bastianello SS: A survey of neoplasia in domestic species over a 40-year period from 1935-1974 in the

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1403
Republic of South Africa. VI. Tumours occurring in
dogs. Onderstepoort J Vet Res 50:199, 1983.
10. Berrocal A, et al: Canine perineal tumours. J Vet
Med A 36:739, 1989.
11. Bostock DE: Neoplasms of the skin and subcutaneous
tissues in dogs and cats. Br Vet J 142:1, 1986.
12. Brodey RS: Canine and feline neoplasia. Adv Vet Sci
14:309, 1970.
13. Burrows AK, et al: Skin neoplasms of cats in Perth.
Aust Vet Pract 24:11, 1994.
14. Carpenter JL, et al: Tumors and tumor-like lesions.
In: Holzworth J (ed): Diseases of the Cat: Medicine
and Surgery, Vol. 1. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1987, p 413.
15. Cotchin E: Skin tumours of cats. Res Vet Sci 2:353,
1961.
16. Degorce F, Parodi AL: Tumeurs conjunctives des
carnivores domestiques. Rec Med Vet 166:1043,
1990.
16a. De Las Mulas JM, et al: Apoptosis and mitosis in
tumours of the skin and subcutaneous tissues of the
dog. Res Vet Sci 66:139, 1999.
17. Er JC, Sutton RH: A survey of skin neoplasms in
dogs from the Brisbane region. Aust Vet J 66:225,
1989.
18. Finnie JW, Bostock DE: Skin neoplasia in dogs. Aust
Vet J 55:602, 1979.
19. Graham JC, O'Keefe DA: Diagnosis and treatment
of soft tissue sarcomas. Comp Cont Educ 15:1627,
1993.
20. Gross TL, Affolter VK: Advances in skin oncology. In:
Kwochka KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary
Dermatology 111. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston,
1998, p 382.
21. Head KW: Some data concerning the distribution of
skin tumors in domestic animals. In: Rook A, Walton
GS (eds): Comparative Physiology and Pathology of
the Skin. F.A. Davis Co, Philadelphia, 1965, p 613.
22. Keller ET, Madewell BR: Locations and types of neoplasms in immature dogs: 69 cases (1964-1989). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1530, 1992.
23. Kuntz CA, et al: Prognostic factors for surgical treatment of soft tissue sarcomas in dogs: 75 cases (19861996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:1147, 1997.
24. Ladds P, et al: Neoplasms of the skin of dogs in
tropical Queensland. Aust Vet J 60:87, 1983.
25. MacEwen EG, Helfand SC: Recent advances in the
biologic therapy of cancer. Comp Cont Educ 15:909,
1993.
26. Macy DW, Reynolds HA: The incidence, characteristics, and clinical management of skin tumors of cats. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:1026, 1981.
27. Magnol JP: Tumeurs cutanees du chien et du chat.
Rec Med vet 166:1061, 1990.
28. Marino DJ, et al: Evaluation of dogs with digit
masses: 117 cases (1981-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
207:726, 1995.
29. Mialot M, Lagadic M: Epidemiologie descriptive des
tumeurs du chien et du chat. Rec Med Vet 166:937,
1990.
30. Miller MA, et al: Cutaneous neoplasia in 340 cats.
Vet Pathol 28:389, 1991.
31. Nielsen SW, Cole CR: Cutaneous epithelial neoplasms of the dog-a report of 153 cases. Am J Vet
Res 21:931, 1960.
32. Priester WA: Skin tumors in domestic animals. Data
from twelve United States and Canadian colleges of
veterinary medicine. J Nat! Cancer Inst 50:457, 1973.

33. Pulley LT, Stannard, AA: Tumors of the skin and soft
tissues. In: Moulton JE (ed): Tumors in Domestic
Animals Ill. University of California Press, Berkeley,
1990, p 23.
34. Rothwell TLW, et al: Skin neoplasms of dogs in Sydney. Aust Vet J 64:161, 1987.
35. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1900-1978: A monograph. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:331, 1980.
36. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1979-1982: Introspective retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:537,
1984.
37. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1983-1985: "The secret sits." J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:255, 1987.
38. Scott DW: Feline dermatology 1986-1988: Looking
to the 1990s through the eyes of many counsellors. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:517, 1990.
39. Susaneck SJ: Feline skin tumors. Comp Cont Educ 5:
251, 1983.
40. Thrall DE, Gillette EL: Soft tissue sarcomas. Semin
Vet Med Surg. 10:173, 1995.
41. Van Den Ingh TSGAM: Huidtumoren bij de Hond.
Tijschr Diergeneeskd 98:538, 1973.
41a. VanKampen KR: Immunotherapy and cytokines.
Semin Vet Med Surg 12:186, 1997.
42. Yager JA, Scott DW: The skin and appendages. In:
Jubb KVF, et al (eds): Pathology of Domestic Animals IV, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York, 1993, p
531.

Cytology
42a. Alleman AR, Bain PJ: Diagnosing neoplasia: The cytologic criteria for malignancy. Vet Med 95:204, 2000.
43. Barton CL: Cytologic analysis of cutaneous neoplasia:
An algorithmic approach. Comp Cont Educ 9:20,
1987.
44. Carter RF, Valli VEO: Advances in the cytologic diagnosis of canine lymphoma. Semin Vet Med Surg
(Small Anim) 3:167, 1988.
45. Hall RL, MacWilliams PS: The cytologic examination
of cutaneous and subcutaneous masses. Semin Vet
Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:94, 1988.
46. Stirtzinger T: The cytologic diagnosis of mesenchymal
tumors. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:157,
1988.
46a. Thrall MA: Cytologic examination of cutaneous and
subcutaneous lumps and lesions. Vet Med 95:224,
2000.

Immunohistochemistry
47. Andreasen CB, et al: Intermediate filament staining in
the cytologic and histologic diagnosis of canine skin
and soft tissue tumors. Vet Pathol 25:343, 1988.
48. Brown PJ: Immunohistochemical localization of myoglobin in connective tissue in tumors in dogs. Vet
Pathol 24:573, 1987.
49. de las Mulas JM, et al: Immunohistochemical distribution pattern of intermediate filament proteins in 50
feline neoplasms. Vet Pathol 32:692, 1995.
50. Desnoyers MM, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of intermediate filament proteins in formalin
fixed normal and neoplastic tissues. Can J Vet Res 54:
360, 1990.
51. Elias JW: Immunohistopathology: A Practical Approach to Diagnosis. American Society of Clinical
Pathologists, Chicago, 1990.
52. Ferrer L, et al: Immunocytochemical demonstration
of intermediate filament proteins, S-100 protein and
CEA in apocrine sweat glands and apocrine glandderived lesions of the dog. J Vet Med A 37:569, 1990.

1404 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
53. Fondevila D, et al: Immunohistochemical localization
of S-IOO protein and lysozyme in canine lymph nodes
and lymphomas. J Vet Med A 36:71, 1989.
54. Fondevila D, et al: Immunoreactivity of canine and
feline mast cell tumours. Schweiz. Arch Tierheilkd
132:426, 1990.
55. Magnol JP, et al: Une nouvelle approche, diagnostique et pronostique des tumeurs des tissus mous du
chien et du chat. Point Vet 22:831, 1991.
56. Moore AS, et al: Immunohistochemical evaluation of
intermediate filament expression in canine and feline
neoplasms. Am J Vet Res 50:88, 1989.
57. Moore PF, et al: The use of immunological reagents
in defining the pathogenesis of canine skin diseases
involving proliferation of leukocytes. In: Kwochka
KW, et al (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 77.
58. Rabanal RH, et al: Immunocytochemical diagnosis of
skin tumours of the dog with special reference to
undifferentiated types. Res Vet Sc 47:129, 1989.
59. Sandusky GE, et al: Diagnostic immunohistochemistry
of canine round cell tumors. Vet Pathol 24:495, 1987.
60. Sandusky GE, et al: Immunocytochemical study of
tissues from clinically normal dogs and of neoplasms
using keratin monoclonal antibodies. Am J Vet Res
52:613, 1991.
61. Thoonen H, et al: Expression of cytokeratins in epithelial tumours of the dog investigated with monoclonal antibodies. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd 132:409,
1990.
62. Von Beust BR, et al: Factor VIII-related antigen in
canine endothelial neoplasms: An immunohistochemical study. Vet Pathol 25:251, 1988.
63. Wallace ML, Smaller BR: Immunohistochemistry in
diagnostic dermatopathology. J Am Acad Dermatol
34:163, 1996.
64. Williamson MM, Middleton DJ: Cutaneous soft tissue
tumours in dogs: classification, differentiation, and
histogenesis. Vet Dermatol 9:43, 1998.

Papilloma
65. Bregman CL, et al: Cutaneous neoplasms in dogs
associated with canine oral papillomavirus vaccine.
Vet Pathol 24:477, 1987.
66. Campbell KL, et al: Cutaneous inverted papillomas in
dogs. Vet Pathol 25:67, 1988.
67. Carney HC, et al: Papillomavirus infection of aged
Persian cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 2:294, 1990.
68. Carpenter JL, et al: Cutaneous xanthogranuloma and
viral papilloma on the eyelid of a cat. Vet Dermatol
3:187, 1992.
69. Egberink HF, et al: Papillomavirus associated skin
lesions in a cat seropositive for feline immunodeficiency virus. Vet Microbiol 31:117, 1992.
70. Le Net JL, et al: Multiple pigmented cutaneous papules associated with a novel canine papillomavirus in
an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34:8, 1997.
71. Lozano-Alarcon F, et al: Persistent papillomavirus infection in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:392, 1996.
72. Lucroy MD, et al: Cutaneous papillomatosis in a dog
with malignant lymphoma following long-term chemotherapy. J Vet Diagn Invest 10:369, 1998.
73. Majewski S, Jablonska S: Human papillomavirus-associated tumors of the skin and mucosa. J Am Acad
Dermatol 36:659, 1997.
74. Mill AB, et al: Concurrent hypothyroidism, IgM deficiency, impaired T-cell mitogen response, and multifocal cutaneous squamous papillomas in a dog. Canine Pract 17:15, 1992.

75. Nagata M, et al: Pigmented plaques associated with
papillomavirus infection in dogs: Is this epidermodysplasia verruciformis? Vet DermatoI6:179, 1995.
76. Narama I, et al: Cutaneous papilloma with viral replication in an old dog. J Vet Med Sci 54:387, 1992.
77. Nicholls PK, Stanley MA: Canine papillomatosis-a
centenary review. J Comp Pathol 120:219, 1999.
78. Schwegler K, et al: Epithelial neoplasms of the skin,
the cutaneous mucosa and the transitional epithelium
in dogs: An immunolocalization study for papillomavirus antigen. J Vet Med A 44:115, 1997.
79. Shimada A, et al: Cutaneous papillomatosis associated
with papillomavirus infection in a dog. J Comp Pathol
108:103, 1993.
80. Sironi G, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of
papillomavirus structural antigens in animal hyperplastic and neoplastic epithelial lesions. J Vet Med A
37:760, 1990.
81. Sundberg JP, et al: Immunoperoxidase localization of
papillomaviruses in hyperplastic and neoplastic epithelial lesions of animals. Am J Vet Res 45:1441,
1984.
82. Sundberg JP, et al: Involvement of canine oral papillomavirus in generalized oral and cutaneous verrucosis in a Chinese Shar Pei dog. Vet Pathol 31:183,
1994.
83. Sundberg JP, et al: Feline papillomaviruses: host
range, molecular diversity and epitope conservation.
Vet Pathol 31:616, 1994.
83a. Sundberg JP, et al: Feline papillomas and papillomaviruses. Vet Pathol 37:1, 2000.
84. Sundberg JP: Canine papillomaviruses. In: Castro AE,
Heuschele WP (eds): Veterinary Diagnostic Virology:
A Practitioner's Guide. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis,
1992, p 148.
85. Sundberg JP, et al: Mucosotropic papillomavirus infections. Lab Anim Sci 48:240, 1998.
86. Teifke JP, et al: Detection of canine oral papillomavirus-DNA in canine oral squamous cell carcinomas
and p53 overexpressing skin papillomas of the dog
using the polymerase chain reaction and nonradioactive in situ hybridization. Vet Microbiol 60:119, 1998.
87. Walder EJ: Malignant transformation of a pigmented
epidermal nevus in a dog. Vet Pathol 34:505, 1997.
88. White SD: Newly introduced drugs in veterinary dermatology. Proc World Cong Vet Dermatol 3:84, 1996.

Keratoacanthoma
89. Kwochka KW: Retinoids in dermatology. In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders
Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 553.
90. Power HT, Ihrke PJ: Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
20:1525, 1990.
91. Smith DA, Knottenbett MK: Spontaneous regression
of intracutaneous cornifying epitheliomata in a dog. J
Small Anim Pract 29:201, 1988.
92. Stannard AA, Pulley LT: Intracutaneous cornifying
epithelioma (keratoacanthoma) in the dog: A retrospective study of 25 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:
385, 1975.

Basal Cell Tumor
93. Anderson WI, Scott DW: Cartilaginous metaplasia associated with a basal cell tumor in a dog. J Comp
Pathol 100:107, 1989.
94. Day DG, et al: Basal cell carcinoma in two cats. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:265, 1994.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1405
95. Diters RW, Walsh KM: Feline basal cell tumors: A
review of 124 cases. Vet Pathol 21:51, 1984.
96. Fehrer SL, Lin SH: Multicentric basal cell tumors in
a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1469, 1986.
97. Maiolino P, et al: Mitotic phase distribution, mitotic
activity, and apoptosis in basal cell tumours of canine
skin. J Vet Med A 43:619, 1996.
98. Seiler RJ: Granular basal cell tumors in the skin of
three dogs: A distinct histopathologic entity. Vet
Pathol 18:23, 1981.
99. Strafuss AC: Basal cell tumors in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 169:322, 1976.

Squamous Cell Carcinoma
100. Baer KE, Helton K: Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in cats. Vet
Pathol 30:535, 1993.
101. Bito T, et al: Less expression of cyclin E in cutaneous
squamous cell carcinomas than in benign and premalignant keratinocyte lesions J Cutan Pathol 24:305,
1997.
102. Bostock DE: Prognosis in cats bearing squamous cell
carcinoma. J SmaIl Anim Pract 13:119, 1972.
103. Clarke RE: Cryosurgical treatment of feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Aust Vet Pract 21:148,
1991.
104. Cox NR, et al: Tumors of the nose and paranasal
sinuses in cats: 32 cases with comparison to a national
database (1977 through 1987). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:339, 1991.
105. Dipold TF, Roberts L: Squamous cell carcinoma in a
white bull terrier. University of Sydney Postgraduate
Committee in Veterinary Science Control and Therapy Series #3837, 1997, P 909.
106. Evans AG, et al: A trial of 13-cis-retinoic acid for
treatment of squamous cell carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions of the head in cats. Am J Vet Res 46:
2553, 1985.
107. Gamblin RM, et al: Overexpression of p53 tumor
suppressor protein in spontaneously arising neoplasms
of dogs. Am J Vet Res 58:85, 1997.
108. Carma-Avifia A: The cytology of squamous cell carcinomas in domestic animals. J Vet Diagn Invest 6:238,
1994.
108a. Gomes LAM, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma associated with actinic dermatitis in seven white cats. Feline Praet 28:14, 2000.
109. Gourley 1M, et al: Bum scar malignancy in a dog. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1095, 1982.
110. Gross TL, Brimacomb BH: Multifocal intraepidermal
carcinoma in a dog histologically resembling Bowen's
disease. Am J Dermatopathol 8:509, 1986.
111. Cuaguere E, et al: Derrwdex cati infestation in association with feline squamous cell carcinoma in situ: a
report of five cases. Vet Dermatol 10:61, 1999.
112. Hahn KA, et al: Photodynamic therapy response in
cats with cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma as a
function of fluence. Vet Dermatol 9:3, 1998.
113. Hargis AM, Thomassen RW: Solar keratosis (solar
dermatosis, senile keratosis) and solar keratosis
with squamous cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 94:193,
1979.
114. Harris CC: p53: at the crossroads of molecular carcinogenesis and molecular epidemiology. J Invest Dermatol Syrnp Proc 1:115, 1996.
115. Haziroglu M, Saylam M: Squamous cell carcinoma in
a puppy. J Comp Pathol 101:221, 1989.
116. Hutson CA, et al: Neoplasia associated with feline

immunodeficiency virus infection in cats in Southern
California. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1357, 1991.
117. Kitchell BE, et al: Intralesional sustained release
chemotherapy with cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil therapeutic implants for treatment of feline squamous cell
carcinoma. Proc Annu Meet Vet Cancer Soc 12:55,
1992.
118. Knowles DP, Hargis AM: Solar elastosis associated
with neoplasia in two Dalmatians. Vet Pathol 23:512,
1986.
119. Lana SE, et al: Feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum and the pinnae: 61 cases. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:329, 1997.
120. Levine N, et al: Controlled localized heating and isotretinoin effects in canine squamous cell carcinoma. J
Am Acad Dermatol 23:68, 1990.
121. Marks SL, et al: Clinical evaluation of etretinate for
the treatment of canine solar-induced squamous cell
carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions. J Am Acad Dermatol 27:11, 1992.
121a. Mayr B, et al: Novel canine tumor suppressor gene
p53, mutations in cases of skin and mammary neoplasms. Vet Res Comm 23:285, 1999.
122. Miller WH Jr, Shanley KJ: Bilateral pinnal squamous
cell carcinoma in a dog with chronic otitis externa.
Vet Dermatol 2:37, 1991.
123. Miller WH Jr, et al: Multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in five cats.
Vet Dermatol 3:177, 1992.
124. O'Brien MG, et al: Treatment by digital amputation
of subungual squamous cell carcinoma in dogs: 21
cases (1987-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:759,
1992.
125. Paradis M, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma of the nail
bed in three related giant schnauzers. Vet Rec 125:
322, 1989.
126. Peaston AE, et al: Photodynamic therapy for nasal
and aural squamous cell carcinoma in cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 202:1261, 1993.
126a. Perez J, et al: Immunohistochemical study of the
inflammatory infiltrate associated with feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma and precancerous lesions (actinic keratosis). Vet Immunol Immunopathol
69:33, 1999.
127. Rees CA, Goldschmidt MH: Cutaneous hom and
squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) in
a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:485, 1998.
128. Rogers KW: Feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma. Feline Pract 22:7, 1994.
129. Rogers KS, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma of the
canine nasal planum: eight cases (1988-1994). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 31:373, 1995.
130. Ruslander D, et al: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:1119,
1997.
131. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claw and
clawbed in cats. Comp Cont Educ 14:449, 1992.
132. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Disorders of the claw and
clawbed in dogs. Comp Cont Educ 14:1448, 1992.
133. Scott DW, Teixeira EAC: Multiple squamous cell carcinomas arising from multiple cutaneous follicular
cysts in a dog. Vet Dermatol 6:27, 1995.
134. Scott DW, Miller WH Jr: Squamous cell carcinoma
arising in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus nasal
lesions in two German shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol
6:99, 1995.
135. Shelley BA, et al: Use of the neodyrnium:yttiriumaluminum-garnet laser for treatment of squamous cell

1406 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
carcinoma of the nasal planum in a cat. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 201:756, 1992.
136. Strafuss AC, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma in dogs.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:425, 1976.
137. Tateyama S, et al: In vitro growth inhibition activities
of recombinant feline interferon on cell lines derived
from canine tumors. Res Vet Sci 59:275, 1995.
138. Teifke JP, Kohr CV: Immunohistochemical detection
of p53 overexpression in paraffin wax-imbedded squamous cell carcinomas of cattle, horses, cats, and dogs.
J Comp Pathol 114:205, 1996.
139. Theon AP, et al: Prognostic factors associated with
radiotherapy of squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
plane in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:991, 1995.
140. Theon AP, et al: Intratumoral administration of carbop latin for treatment of squamous cell carcinomas of
the nasal plane in cats. Am J Vet Res 57:205, 1996.
141. van Vechtem MK, Theon AP: Strontium-90 plesiotherapy for treatment of early squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum in 30 cats. Proc Annu
Meet Vet Cancer Soc 13:107, 1993.
142. Withrow SJ, Straw RC: Resection of the nasal planum
in nine cats and five dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
26:219, 1990.

Hair Follicle Tumors
142a. Abramo F, et al: Survey of canine and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central Italy. J
Small Anim Pract 40:479, 1999.
143. Diters RW, Goldschmidt MH: Hair follicle tumors
resembling tricholemmomas in six dogs. Vet Pathol
20:123, 1983.
144. Fukui K, et al: [Two cases of canine malignant basal
tumor]. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 45:856, 1992.
145. Hill JR: Warty dyskeratoma in two dogs. Proc Annu
Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet
Dermatol 3:40, 1987.
146. Luther PB, et al: The dilated pore of Winer-An
overlooked cutaneous lesion of cats. J Comp Pathol
101:375, 1989.
147. Rodriguez F, et al: Metastatic pilomatrixoma associated with neurological signs in a dog. Vet Rec 137:
247, 1995.
148. Scott OW, Flanders JF: Dilated pore of Winer in a
cat. Feline Pract 14:33, 1984.
149. Scott OW, Anderson WI: Canine hair follicle neoplasms: A retrospective analysis of 80 cases (19861987). Vet Dermatol 2:143, 1991.
150. Scott OW, Anderson WI: Hair follicle neoplasms in
three cats. Feline Pract 19:14, 1991.

Sebaceous Gland Tumors
151. Finazzi M, et al: Reperti istologici su tumori delle
ghiandole sebacee del cane. Clin Vet 110:123, 1987.
152. Scott OW, Anderson WI: Canine sebaceous gland tumors: A retrospective analysis of 172 cases, Canine
Pract 15:19, 1990.
153. Scott OW, Anderson WI: Feline sebaceous gland tumors: A retrospective analysis of nine cases. Feline
Pract 19:16, 1991.
154. Strafuss AC: Sebaceous carcinoma in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 169:325, 1976.
155. Strafuss AC: Sebaceous gland adenomas in dogs. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 169:640, 1976.

Sweat Gland Tumors
156. Christie GS, [abara AG: Canine sweat gland growths.
Res Vet Sci 5:237, 1964.
157. Jabara AG, Finnie JW: Four cases of clear-cell hidra-

denocarcinomas in the dog. J Comp Pathol 88:525,
1978.
158. Kalaher KM, et al: Neoplasms of the apocrine sweat
glands in 44 dogs and 10 cats. Vet Rec 127:400, 1990.
159. Kusters AH, et al: Atrichial sweat gland adenocarcinoma in the dog. Vet Dermatol 10:51, 1999.
160. Mayr B, et al: Autosomale Monosomie (B2!E3) und
Deletion (B2!E3) in Schweissdriisentumorgewebe bei
Katzen (2 Fallberichte). Wien Tierarztl Mschr 83:141,
1996.
161. Meschter CL: Disseminated sweat gland adenocarcinoma with acronecrosis in a cat. Cornell Vet 81:195,
1991.
162. Soga R, et al: A case of canine apocrine gland carcinoma metastasized to bones. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 49:
110, 1996.

Perianal Gland Tumors
163. Ross JT, et al: Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine
glands of the anal sac in dogs: A review of 32 cases. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:349, 1991.
164. Vail OM, et al: Perianal adenocarcinoma in the canine male: A retrospective study of 41 cases. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:329, 1990.
165. Vercelli A: Immunohistochemical identification of estrogen and androgen receptors in canine perianal adenoma. Proc Annu Cong Eur Soc Vet Dermatol Eur
Coli Vet Dermatol 14:204, 1997.
166. Vos JH, et al: The expression of keratins, vimentin,
neurofilament proteins, smooth muscle actin, neuronspecific enolase, and synaptophysin in tumors of the
specific glands in tile canine anal region. Vet Pathol
30:352, 1993.

Salivary Gland Tumors
167. Carberry CA, et al: Salivary gland tumors in dogs and
cats: A literature and case review. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 24:561, 1988.

Feline Sarcoid
168. Gumbrell RC, et al: Dermal fibropapillomas in cats.
Vet Rec 142:370, 1998.

Fibrosarcoma
169. Bostock DE, Dye MT: Prognosis after surgical excision of fibrosarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
175:727, 1979.
170. Bostock DE, Dye MT: Prognosis after surgical excision of canine fibrous connective tissue sarcomas. Vet
Pathol 17:581, 1980.
171. Doliger S, Devauchelle P: Donnees actuelles sur les
tumeurs du "cornplexe fibrosarcome felin." Point Vet
29:405, 1998.
172. Harasen GLG: Multicentric fibrosarcoma in a cat and
a review of the literature. Can Vet J 24:207, 1984.
173. Hilmas 0, Gillete E: Radiotherapy of spontaneous
connective tissue sarcomas in animals. Cancer Res 56:
365, 1976.
174. Karademir N, et al: Comparison of argyrophil nucleolar organizer region counts, proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) indices and mitotic indices in fibromas and fibrosarcomas. Folia Vet 42:67, 1998.
175. Kent EM: Use of an immunostimulant as an aid in
treatment and management of fibrosarcoma in three
cats. Feline Pract 21:13, 1993.
176. King GK, et al: The effect of acemannan immunostimulant in combination with surgery and radiation
therapy on spontaneous canine and feline fibrosarcomas. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:439, 1995.
177. Mayr B, et al: Trisomy 01, marker Fl: new cytoge-

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1407
netic findings in two cases of feline fibrosarcoma. J
Vet Med A 41:197, 1994.
178. Mayr B, et al: Mutations in tumour suppressor gene
p53 in two feline fibrosarcomas. Br Vet J 151:707,
1995.
179. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic variation between four
cases of feline fibrosarcoma. Res Vet Sci 61:268,
1996.
180. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic alterations in four feline soft tissue tumours. Vet Res Commun 22:21,
1998.
181. Mayr B, et al: Novel p53 tumour suppressor mutations in cases of spindle cell sarcoma, pleomorphic
sarcoma and fibrosarcoma in cats. Vet Res Comm 22:
249, 1998.
182. McChesney SL, et al: Radiotherapy of soft tissue sarcomas in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:60, 1989.
183. McChesney-Gillette S, et al: Response of canine soft
tissue sarcomas to radiation or radiation plus hyperthermia: a randomized phase II study. Int J Hyperthermia 8:309, 1992.

Myxoma
184. Rowland PH, et al: Myxoma at the site of a subcutaneous pacemaker in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
27:649, 1991.
Neural Tumors
185. Brehm DM, et al: A retrospective evaluation of 51
cases of peripheral nerve sheath tumors in the dog. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:349, 1995.
186. Geyer C, et al: Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural investigation of granular cell tumours in dog,
cat, and horse. J Vet Med B 39:485, 1992.
187. Gross TL, Carr SH: Amputation neuroma of docked
tails in dogs. Vet Pathol 27:61, 1990.
188. Herrera GA, Mendoza A: Primary canine cutaneous
meningioma. Vet Pathol 18:127, 1981.
189. Jones BR, et al: Nerve sheath tumours in the dog and
cats. N Z Vet J 43:190, 1995.
190. Patniak AK: Histologic and immunohistochemical
studies of granular cell tumors in seven dogs, three
cats, one horse, and one bird. Vet Pathol 30:176,
1993.
Vascular Tumors
191. Augustin-Voss HG, et al: Phenotypic characterization
of normal and neoplastic canine endothelial cells by
lectin histochemistry. Vet Pathol 27:103, 1990.
192. Barnes JC, et al: Disseminated lymphangiosarcoma in
a dog. Can Vet J 38:42, 1997.
192a. Belanger MC, et al: Invasive multiple lymphangiomas in a young dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:
507, 1999.
193. Berry WL, et al: Lymphangiomatosis of the pelvic
limb in a Maltese dog. J Small Anim Praet 37:340,
1996.
194. Brown NO, et al: Canine hemangiosarcoma: Retrospective analysis of 104 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
186:56, 1985.
194a. Chun R: Feline and canine hemangiosarcoma. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 21:622, 1999.
195. Danielson F: Lymphangioma in the metacarpal pad
of a dog. J Small Anim Pract 39:295, 1998.
196. Delisle F, et al: L'hemangiosarcome chez Ie chien.
Point Vet 28:73, 1996.
196a. Demanuelle TC, et al: Idiopathic telangiectasia in a
Golden Retriever. Vet Dermatol 1O:311, 1999.
197. Evans SM: Canine hemangiosarcoma: A retrospective

analysis of response to surgery and orthovoltage radiation. Vet Radiol 28:13, 1987.
198. Ferrer L, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of
CD31 antigen in normal and neoplastic endothelial
cells. J Comp Pathol 112:319, 1995.
199. Fossum TW, et al: Generalized lymphangiectasis in a
dog with subcutaneous chyle and lymphangioma. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 197:231, 1990.
200. George C, Summers BA: Angiokeratoma: A benign
vascular tumor of the dog. J Small Anim Pract 31:
390, 1990.
201. Ginn PE, Kunkle GA: Hemangiosarcoma of multiple
digits in a cat. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol 13:110, 1997.
202. Graves GM, et al: Canine hemangiopericytoma: 23
cases (1967-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:99,
1988.
203. Hammer AS, et al: Efficacy and toxicity of VAC
chemotherapy (vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide) in dogs with hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Int Med
5:160, 1991.
203a. Handharyani E, et al: Canine hemangiopericytoma:
an evaluation of metastatic potential. J Vet Diagn
Invest 1l:474, 1999.
204. Hargis AM, Feldman BF: Evaluation of hemostatic defects secondary to vascular tumors in dogs:
II cases (1983-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:891.
1991.
205. Hargis AM, et al: A retrospective clinicopathologic
study of 212 dogs with cutaneous hemangiomas and
hemangiosarcomas. Vet Pathol 29:316, 1992.
206. Hinrichs U, et al: Lymphoangiosarcomas in cats: a
retrospective study of 12 cases. Vet Pathol 36:164,
1999.
207. Kraje AC, et al: Unusual metastatic behavior and clinicopathologic findings in eight cats with cutaneous or
visceral hemangiosarcoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:
670, 1999.
208. Lewis DL, Harari J: Peripheral arteriovenous fistula
associated with a subcutaneous hemangiosarcomalhemangioma in a cat. Feline Pract 20:27, 1992.
209. Mayr B, et al: Trisomy 2 in three cases of canine
haemangiopericytoma. Br Vet J 148:113, 1992.
210. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic characterization of a fibroma and three haemangiopericytomas in domestic
dogs. Br Vet J 151:433, 1995.
211. Mialot M: Tumeurs vasculaires de localisation cutanee
chez Ie chat: etude d'une serie de 40 cas. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 30:571, 1995.
212. Miller MA, et al: Cutaneous vascular neoplasia in 15
cats: Clinical, morphologic, and immunohistochemical
studies. Vet Pathol 29:329, 1992.
213. Perez J, et al: Immunohistochemical characterization
of hemangiopericytomas and other spindle cell tumors
in the dog. Vet Pathol 33:391, 1996.
214. Post K, et al: Cutaneous lymphangioma in a young
dog. Can Vet J 32:747, 1991.
215. Postorino NC, et al: Prognostic variables for canine
hemangiopericytoma: 50 cases (1979-1984). J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 24:501, 1988.
216. Sagartz JE, et al: Lymphangiosarcoma in a young dog.
Vet Pathol 33:353, 1996.
217. Scavelli TD, et al: Hemangiosarcoma in the cat: Retrospective evaluation of 31 surgical cases. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 187:817, 1987.
218. Shiga A, et al: Lymphangiosarcoma in a dog. J Vet
Med Sci 56:1199, 1994.
219. Srebemik N, Appleby EC: Breed prevalence and sites

1408 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
of haemangioma and haemangiosarcoma in dogs. Vet
Rec 129:408, 1991.
220. Swayne DE, et al: Lymphangiosarcoma and haemangiosarcoma in a cat. J Comp Pathol 100:91, 1989.
221. Turrel JM, et al: Response to radiation therapy of
recurring lymphangioma in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 193:1432, 1988.
221a. Vail DM, et al: Liposome-encapsulated muramyl tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine (L-MTP-E) adjuvant immunotherapy for splenic hemangiosarcoma in
the dog: a randomized multi-institutional clinical trial.
Clin Cancer Res 1:1165, 1995.
222. Walsh KM, Abbot DP: Lymphangiosarcoma in two
cats. J Comp Pathol 94:611, 1984.
223. Ward H, et al: Cutaneous hemangiosarcoma in 25
dogs: a retrospective study. J Vet Int Med 8:345,
1994.
224. White SD, et al: Acquired cutaneous lymphangiectasis
in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1093, 1988.
225. Woods JP, et al: Concurrent lymphangioma, immunemediated thrombocytopenia, and von Willebrands disease in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:70, 1995.
226. Xu FN: Ultrastructure of canine hemangiopericytoma.
Vet Pathol 23:643, 1986.

Adipose Tissue Tumors
227. Albers GW, Theilen GH: Calcium chloride for treatment of subcutaneous lipomas in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 186:492, 1985.
228. Bergman PJ, et al: Infiltrative lipoma in dogs: 16
cases (1981-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:322,
1994.
229. Esplin DG: Infiltrating lipoma in a cat. Feline Pract
14:24, 1984.
230. Esplin DG, et al: Metastasizing liposarcoma associated with a vaccine site in a cat. Feline Pract 24:20,
1996.
231. Frazier KS, et al: Infiltrative lipoma in a canine stifle
joint. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:81, 1993.
232. Mayr B, et al: Zytogenetische Veranderungen in Lipomen bei Katzen (2 Fallberichte). Wien Tierarztl
Mschr 83:230, 1996.
233. McCarthy PE, et al: Liposarcoma associated with a
glass foreign body in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
209:612, 1996.
234. Messick JB, Radin MJ: Cytologic, histologic and ultrastructural characteristics of a canine myxoid liposarcoma. Vet Pathol 25:520, 1988.
234a. Reimann N, et al: Cytogenetic investigations of canine lipomas. Cancer Genetics 111:172, 1999.
235. Stephens LC, et al: Virus-associated liposarcoma and
malignant lymphoma in a kitten, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:123, 1983.

Leiomyoma and Leiomyosarcoma
236. Finnie JW, et al: Multiple piloleiomyomas in a cat. J
Comp Pathol 113:201, 1995.
236a. Jacobsen MC, Valentine BA: Dermal intravascular
leiomyosarcoma in a cat. Vet Pathol 37:100, 2000.

Rhabdomyoma and Rhabdomyosarcoma
237. Martin de las Mulas, J, et al: Desmin and vimentin
immunocharacterization of feline muscle tumors. Vet
Pathol 29:260, 1992.
238. Roth L: Rhabdomyoma of the ear pinna in four cats.
J Comp Pathol 103:237, 1990.

Osteoma and Osteosarcoma
239. Easton CB: Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in a cat. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 30:59, 1994.

240. Jabara AG, Paton JS: Extraskeletal osteoma in a cat.
Aust Vet J 61:405, 1984.
241. Kuntz CA, et al: Extraskeletal osteosarcomas in dogs:
14 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:26, 1998.
242. Langenbach A, et al: Extraskeletal osteosarcomas in
dogs: a retrospective study of 169 cases (1986-1986).
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:113, 1998.

Chondroma and Chondrosarcoma
243. Davidson JR: Canine and feline chondrosarcoma.
Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:1109, 1995.
244. Popovitch CA, et al: Chondrosarcoma: A retrospective
study of 97 dogs (1987-1990). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 30:81, 1994.

Postvaccinal Sarcomas
245. Briscoe CM, et al: Pulmonary metastasis of a feline
vaccine-site fibrosarcoma. J Vet Diagn Invest 10:79,
1998.
246. Burton G, Mason KV: Do postvaccinal sarcomas occur in Australian cats? Aust Vet J 75:102, 1997.
247. Coyne MJ, et al: Estimated prevalence of injectionsite sarcomas in cats during 1992. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 210:249, 1997.
247a. Cronin K, et al: Radiation therapy and surgery for
fibrosarcoma in 33 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:.51,
1998.
248. Doddy FD, et al: Feline fibrosarcomas at vaccine
sites and nonvaccine sites. J Comp Pathol 114:165,
1996.
249. Ellis JA, et al: Use of immunohistochemistry and
polymerase chain reaction for detection of oncomavirus in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded fibrosarcomas from cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:767,
1996.
250. Esplin DG, Campbell R: Widespread metastasis of
fibrosarcoma associated with a vaccine site in a cat.
Feline Pract 23:13, 1995.
250a. Gagnon AC: Drug injection-associated fibrosarcoma
in a cat. Feline Pract 28:18, 2000.
251. Hendrick MJ, Brooks JJ: Postvaccinal sarcomas in the
cat: Histology and immunohistochemistry. Vet Pathol
31:126, 1994.
252. Hendrick MJ, et al: Comparison of fibrosarcomas that
developed at vaccine sites and at nonvaccine sites in
cats: 239 cases (1991-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc
205:1425, 1994.
252a. Hershey AE, et al: Prognosis for presumed feline
vaccine-associated sarcoma after excision: 61 cases
(1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:58, 2000.
253. Kass PH, et al: Epidemiologic evidence for a causal
relation between vaccination and fibrosarcoma tumorigenesis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:396, 1993.
254. Lester S, et al: Vaccine site-associated sarcomas in
cats: clinical experience and a laboratory review
(1982-1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:91, 1996.
255. Macy DW, et al: Vaccine-associated sarcomas in cats.
Feline Pract 23:24, 1995.
256. Macy DW, Hendrick MJ: The potential role of inflammation in the development of post vaccinal sarcomas in cats. J Small Anim Pract 36:103, 1996.
257. Mikaelian I, et al: Les sarcomes post-vaccinaux felins.
Med Vet Quebec 27:133, 1997.
258. Rudmann DG, et al: Pulmonary and mediastinal metastases of a vaccine-site sarcoma in a cat. Vet Pathol
33:466, 1996.
259. Sandler I, et al: Metastatic vaccine-associated fibrosarcoma in a lO-year-old cat. Can Vet J 38:374, 1997.
260. Schultze AE, et al: Repeated physical and cytologic

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1409
characterizations of subcutaneous postvaccinal reactions in cats. Am J Vet Res 58:719, 1997.
261. Weigand CM, Brewer WG Jr: Vaccine-site sarcomas
in cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:869, 1996.

Undifferentiated Sarcomas
262. Carpenter JL, et al: Distinctive unclassified mesenchymal tumor of the digit of dogs. Vet Pathol 28:396,
1991.
263. Kipar A, et al: Round cell sarcomas of possible myelomonocytic origin localized at the lip of aged dogs.
J Vet Med A 42:185, 1995.
264. Sanders NA, et al: Aggressive, undifferentiated sarcoma with widespread metastasis in a six-month-old
Neopolitan mastiff. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:97,
1996.

Mast Cell Tumor
264a. Abadie JJ, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of
proliferating cell nuclear antigen and Ki-67 in mast
cell tumors from dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:
1629, 1999.
265. Al-Sarraf R, et al: A prospective study of radiation
therapy for the treatment of grade 2 mast cell tumors
in 32 dogs. Vet Int Med 10:376, 1996.
266. Ayl RD, et al: Correlation of DNA ploidy to tumor
histologic grade, clinical variables, and survival in
dogs with mast cell tumors. Vet Pathol 29:386, 1992.
267. Beadleston DL, et al: Chymase and tryptase staining
of normal feline skin and of feline cutaneous mast
cell tumors. Vet Allergy Clin Immunol 5:54, 1997.
268. Bell A, et al: Visceral and cutaneous mast cell neoplasia in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 24:86, 1994.
269. Bensignor E, et al: Le mastocytome cutane canin:
Resultats d'une etude anatomoclinique et therapeutique de 85 cas. Rec Med Vet 173:351, 1996.
270. Bostock DE: The prognosis following surgical removal
of mastocytomas in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 14:27,
1973.
271. Brown CA, Chalmers SA: Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis in a cat. Vet Pathol 27:366, 1990.
272. Buerger RG, Scott, DW: Cutaneous mast cell neoplasia in the cat: 14 cases (1975-1985). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 190:1440, 1987.
273. Cayatte SM, et al: Identification of mast cells in bully
coat preparations from dogs with inflammatory skin
diseases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:325, 1995.
274. Chastain CB, et al: Benign cutaneous mastocytomas
in two litters of Siamese kittens. J Am Vet Med Assoc
193:959, 1988.
275. Cole W: Mast cell tumor in a puppy. Can Vet J 31:
457, 1990.
276. Davis BJ, et al: Cutaneous mastocytosis in a dog. Vet
Pathol 29:363, 1992.
276a. Elmslie R: Combination chemotherapy with and
without surgery for dogs with high grade mast cell
tumors with lymph node metastasis. Vet Cancer Soc
Newsletter 20:6, 1997.
277. Frimberger AE, et al: Radiotherapy of incompletely
resected, moderately differentiated mast cell tumors
in the dog: 37 cases (1989-1993). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 33:320, 1997.
277a. Gerritsen RJ, et al: Multi-agent chemotherapy for
mast cell tumours in the dog. Vet Quart 20:28,
1998.
277b. Ginn PE, et al: Immunohistochemical detection of
p53 tumor-suppressor protein is a poor indicator of
prognosis for canine cutaneous mast cell tumors. Vet
Pathol 37:33, 2000.

278. Grier RL, et al: Mast cell tumour destruction in dogs
by hypotonic solution. J Small Anim Hosp Assoc 36:
385, 1995.
278a. Jaffe MH, et al: Immunohistochemical and clinical
evaluation of p53 in canine cutaneous mast cell tumors. Vet Pathol 37:40, 2000.
278b. Jaffe MH, et al: Deionised water as an adjunct to
surgery for the treatment of canine cutaneous mast
cell tumours. J Small Anim Pract 41:7, 2000.
279. Jeromin AM, et al: Urticaria pigmentosa-like disease
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:508, 1993.
280. Kravis LD, et al: Frequency of argyrophilic nucleolar
orga~izer regions in fine-needle aspirates and biopsy
speCimens from mast cell tumors in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 209:1418, 1996.
281. Legoretta RA, et al: Use of hyperthermia and radiotherapy in treatment of a large mast cell sarcoma in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:1545, 1988.
282. Lemarie RJ, et al: Mast cell tumors: clinical management. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet 17:1085, 1995.
283. London C, et al: Expression of stem cell factor receptor (c-kit) by the malignant mast cells from spontaneous canine mast cell tumours. J Comp Pathol 115:
399, 1996.
283a. London CA, et al: Spontaneous canine mast cell tumors express tandem duplications in the proto-oncogene c-kit. Exper Hematol 27:689, 1999.
284. Long RD: Cutaneous mast cell tumor in a Siamese
kitten. Can Vet J 37:167, 1996.
284a. Lopez A, et al: Cutaneous mucinosis and mastocytosis in a Shar-Pei. Can Vet J 40:881, 1999.
284b. Ma Y, et al: Clustering of activating mutations in ckits juxtamembrane coding region in canine mast cell
neoplasms. J Invest Dermatol 112:165, 1999.
285. Madewell BR, et al: Cutaneous mastocytosis and mucinosis with gross deformity in a Shar pei dog. Vet
Dermatol 3:171, 1992.
286. Magnol JP, Toulemonde N: Histopronostic du mastocytome canin. Validite du grading de Patnaik. Rev
Med Vet 138:125, 1987.
287. McCaw DL, et al: Response of canine mast cell tumors to treatment with oral prednisone. J Vet Int
Med 8:406, 1994.
288. McCaw DL, et al: Vincristine therapy for mast cell
tumors in dogs. J Vet Int Med 11:375, 1997.
288a. McManus PM: Frequency and severity of mastocytemia in dogs with and without mast cell tumors: 120
cases (1995-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:355,
1999.
289. Miller DM: The occurrence of mast cell tumors in
young Shar Peis. J Vet Diagn Invest 7:360, 1995.
290. Molander-McCrary H, et al: Cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats: 32 cases (1991-1994). J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 34:281, 1998.
290a. Parodi A: Le mastocytome du chien est-il une tumeur genetique? Point Vet 31:67, 2000.
291. Patnaik AK, et al: Canine cutaneous mast cell tumor:
Morphologic grading and survival time in 83 dogs.
Vet Pathol 21:469, 1984.
292. Peterson SL: Scar-associated canine mast cell tumor.
Canine Pract 12:23, 1985.
293. Reguera MJ, et al: Canine mast cell tumors express
stem cell factor receptor (c-kit), Proc Annu Memb
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli Vet Dermatol
15:77, 1999.
293a. Russnick KM, et al: Treatment of canine mast cell
tumors with CCNU (Lomustine). J Vet Intern Med
13:601, 1999.

1410 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
294. Simoes JPC, Schoning P: Canine mast cell tumors: a
comparison of staining techniques. J Vet Diagn Invest
6:458, 1994.
295. Simoes JPC, et aI: Prognosis of canine mast cell tumors: A comparison of three methods. Vet Pathol 31:
637, 1994.
295a. Thamm DH, et aI: Prednisone and vinblastine
chemotherapy for canine mast cell tumor-41 cases
(1992-1997). J Vet Intern Med 13:491, 1999.
296. Thiel W: Mastzellentumoren bei Hunden-Auswertung
pathologtsch-histologtscher Untersuchungsbefunde der
Jahre 1980 bis 1986 mit Hinweis auf die TNM-Klassifizierung von Tumoren bei Haustieren. Kleintier-Prax
35:401, 1990.
297. Tinsley PE, Taylor DO: Immunotherapy for multicentric malignant mastocytoma in a dog. Mod Vet Pract
68:225, 1987.
298. Turrel JM, et aI: Prognostic factors for radiation treatment of mast cell tumors in 85 dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 193:936, 1988.
299. Vitale CB, et al: Feline urticaria pigmentosa in three
related Sphinx cats. Vet Dermatol 7:227, 1996.
300. Wilcock BP, et aI: The morphology and behavior of
feline cutaneous mastocytomas. Vet Pathol 23:320,
1986.

Lymphoma
301. Ashley PF, Bowman LA: Symmetric cutaneous necrosis of the hind feet and multicentric follicular lymphoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:211, 1999.
302. Baker JL, Scott DW: Mycosis fungoides in two cats. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:97, 1989.
303. Beale KM, et aI: An unusual presentation of cutaneous lymphoma in two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
26:429, 1990.
304. Beale KM, Bolon B: Canine cutaneous lymphosarcoma: Epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic, a retrospective study. In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds): Advances in
Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p 273.
304a. Bensignor E, Carlotti DN: Un cas de lymphome
cutane T non-epitheliotrope chez un chien leishmanien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:551, 1999.
305. Bergman R, et al: Immunophenotyping and T-cell
receptor gene rearrangement analysis as an adjunct to
the histopathologic diagnosis of mycosis fungoides. J
Am Acad Dermatol 39:554, 1998.
306. Caciolo PL, et aI: Cutaneous lymphosarcoma in the
cat: A report of nine cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
20:505, 1984.
307. Caniati M, et aI: Canine lymphoma: immunocytochemical analysis of fine-needle aspiration and biopsy,
Vet Pathol 33:204, 1996.
307a. Chui CT, et aI: Epidermotropic cutaneous B-cell
lymphoma mimicking mycosis fungoides. J Am Acad
Dermatol 41:271, 1999.
308. Day MJ: Immunophenotypic characterization of cutaneous lymphoid neoplasia in the dog and cat. J Comp
Pathol 112:79, 1995.
309. DeBoer DJ, et al: Mycosis fungoides in a dog: Demonstration of T-cell specificity and response to radiotherapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:566, 1990.
310. Fivenson DP, et aI: Dermal dendrocytes and T-cells
in canine mycosis fungoides. Cancer 70:2091, 1992.
311. Fivenson DP, et aI: T-cell receptor gene rearrangement in canine mycosis fungoides: further support for
a canine model of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Invest Dermatol102:227, 1994.
:312. Ghernati I, et aI: Retrovirus-like particles associated

with neoplastic CD8+ T lymphocytes in a case of
canine cutaneous lymphoma: establishment and characterization of a longterm T-cell line. In: Kwochka
KW, et aI (eds): Advances in Veterinary Dermatology
III. Butterworth, Heinemann, Boston, 1998, p 433.
312a. Ghernati I, et aI: Characterization of a canine longterm T cell line (DLC 01) established from a dog
with Sezary syndrome and producing retroviral particles. Leukemia 13:1281, 1999.
313. Gruber A, et al: Mycosis fungoides bei drei Hunden:
Differentialdiagnostiche Abgrenzung durch immunhistochemischen Nachweis der T-Zell-SpezifitiU des
Hautinfiltrates. Kleintierpraxis 40:569, 1995.
314. Iwamoto KS, et al: Linoleate produces remission
in canine mycosis fungoides. Cancer Letter 64:17,
1992.
315. Jackson ML, et aI: Immunohistochemical identification of Band T lymphocytes in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded feline lymphosarcomas: Relation to feline leukemia virus status, tumor site, and patient age.
Can J Vet Res 60:199, 1996.
316. Lernarie SL, Eddlestone SM: Treatment of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma with dacarbazine in a dog. Vet Dermatol 8:41, 1997.
317. Miller WH Jr: Canine cutaneous lymphomas. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy VII. W.B.
Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1980, p 493.
318. Moore PF, et al: Canine cutaneous epitheliotropio
lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) is a proliferative disorder of CD8+ T cells. Am J Pathol 144:421, 1994.
319. Moore PF, Olivry T: Cutaneous lymphomas in companion animals. Clin Dermatol 12:499, 1994.
320. Moriello KA, et al: Peg t-asparaginase in the treatment of canine epitheliotropic lymphoma and histiocytic proliferative dermatitis. In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds):
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p 293.
321. Olivry T, et al: Investigation of epidermotropisrn in
canine mycosis fungoides: Expression of intercellular
adhesion molecule-I (ICAM-I) and 82 integrins. Arch
Dermatol Res 287:186, 1995.
322. Petersen A, et al: The use of saffiower oil for the
treatment of mycosis fungoides in two dogs. Proc
Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coli
Vet Dermatol 15:49, 1999.
323. Poisson L, et aI: Heticulose pagetorde generalisee
(forme de Ketron-Coodman) chez un chien. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 31:219, 1996.
324. Schick RO, et al: Cutaneous lymphosarcoma and leukemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1155, 1993.
325. Shapiro PE, Pinto FJ: The histologic spectrum of
mycosis fungoides/Sezary syndrome (cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma): A review of 222 biopsies, including newly
described patterns and the earliest pathologic
changes. Am J Surg Pathol 18:645, 1994.
326. Smith KC, et al: Canine lymphomatoid granulomatosis: An immunophenotypic analysis of three cases. J
Comp Pathol 115:129, 1996.
327. Smoller BR, et aI: Reassessment of histologic parameters in the diagnosis of mycosis fungoides. Am J Surg
Pathol 19:1423, 1995.
328. Stoeckli R, et aI: Canine epidcrmotropic lymphoma
associated with the intercellular deposition of immunoglobulin on direct immunofluorescence testing.
Comp Anim Pract 1:36, 1988.
329. Thrall MA, et aI: Cutaneous lymphosarcoma and leukemia in a dog, resembling Sezary syndrome in man.
Vet Pathol 21:182, 1984.

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1411
330. Tobey JC, et al: Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in a cat.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:606, 1994.
331. Tok J, et al: Detection of clonal T-cell receptor chain
gene rearrangements by polymerase chain reaction
and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR,
DGGE) in archival specimens from patients with
early cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: Correlation of histologic findings with PCRlDGGE. J Am Acad Dermatol 38:453, 1998.
332. Walton DK: Canine epiderrnotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides and pagetoid reticulosis). In: Kirk RW
(ed): Current Veterinary Therapy IX. W.B. Saunders
Co, Philadelphia, 1986, p 609.
333. White SD, et al: Use of isotretinoin and etretinate for
the treatment of benign cutaneous neoplasia and cutaneous lymphoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:
387, 1993.
334. Wilcock BP, Yager JA: The behavior of epiderrnotropic lymphoma in 25 dogs. Can Vet J 30:754, 1989.

Pseudolymphoma
335. Miller WH Jr, et al: A spontaneously regressing pseudolymphoma in a dog resembling pseudo-Hodgkin's
disease. Vet Dermatol 1:171, 1990.
336. Ploysangam T, et al: Cutaneous pseudolymphomas. J
Am Acad Dermatol 38:877, 1998.

Histiocytoma
337. Affolter VK, Moore PF: Canine histiocytic proliferative disease. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am Acad Vet
Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 15:79, 1999.
338. Collins BK, et al: Idiopathic granulomatous disease
with ocular adnexal and cutaneous involvement in a
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:313, 1992.
338a. Florek C, Wilkins BE: A Basset hound with swollen
third eyelids and skin masses. Vet Med 95:99, 2000.
339. Kipar A, et al: Expression of major histocompatibility
complex class II antigen in neoplastic cells of canine
cutaneous histiocytoma. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
62:1, 1998.
340. Marchal T, et al: Immunophenotypic and ultrastructural evidence of the Langerhans cell origin of the
canine cutaneous histiocytoma. Acta Anat 153:189,
1995.
341. Mays MBC, Bergeron JA: Cutaneous histiocytosis in
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:377, 1986.
342. Moore F, et al: Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is an
epidermotropic Langerhans cell histiocytosis that expresses CDI and specific B2-integrin molecules. Am J
Pathol 148:1699, 1996.
343. Scott DW: Canine cutaneous histiocytoses. In: Kirk
RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 625.
344. Thornton RN, Tisdall CJ: Multiple cutaneous histiocytosis in two dogs. N Z Vet J 36:192, 1988.

Systemic Histiocytosis
345. Brearley MJ, et al.: Systemic histiocytosis in a Bernese Mountain dog. J Small Anim Pract 35:271,1994.
346. Moore PF: Systemic histiocytosis of Bernese Mountain dogs. Vet Pathol 21:554, 1984.
347. Nagata M, et al: Progressive Langerhans cell histiocytosis in a young dog. Proc Annu Memb Meet Am
Acad Vet Dermatol Am Coil Vet Dermatol 14:7,1998.
348. Padgett GA, et al: Inheritance of histiocytosis in Bernese Mountain dogs. J Small Anim Pract 36:93, 1995.
349. Paterson S, et al: Systemic histiocytosis in the Bernese Mountain dog. J Small Anim Pract 36:233, 1995.
350. Scott DW, et al: Systemic histiocytosis in two dogs.
Canine Pract 14:7, 1987.

Malignant Histiocytosis
351. Hayden DW, et al: Disseminated malignant histiocytosis in a golden retriever: Clinicopathologic, ultrastructural, and immunohistochemical findings. Vet
Pathol 30:256, 1993.
352. Marholdt F, Besch A: Maligne Histiozytose bei einem
Berner sennehund. Pract Tierarztl. 75:690, 1994.
353. Moore PF, Rosin A: Malignant histiocytosis of Bernese Mountain dogs. Vet Pathol 23:1, 1986.
354. Scott DW, et al: Lymphoreticular neoplasia in a dog
resembling malignant histiocytosis (histiocytic medullary reticulosis) in man. Cornell Vet 69:176, 1979.
355. Tsuda T, et al: A case of canine malignant histiocytosis. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 51:259, 1998.
356. Uno Y, et al: Malignant histiocytosis with multiple
skin lesions in a dog. J Vet Med Sci 55:1059, 1993.

Benign Fibrous Histiocytoma
357. Paulsen ME, et al: Nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis in dogs: 19 cases (1973-1985). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 190:1581, 1987.
358. Smith JS, et al: Infiltrative corneal lesions resembling
fibrous histiocytoma: Clinical and pathologic findings
in six dogs and one cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:
722, 1976.

Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma
359. Barnes M, et al: Tumor induction following intraoperative radiotherapy: late results of the National Cancer
Institute canine trials. Int J Radiat Oncol BioI Phys
19:651, 1990.
360. Kerlin RL, Hendrick MJ: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma and malignant histiocytosis in the dog-convergent or divergent phenotypic differentiation? Vet
Pathol 33:713, 1996.
361. Legrand JJ, et al: Histiocytome fibreux malin chez un
chat. Etude d'un cas clinique et comparaison avec les
donnees de la literature. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
22:401, 1987.
362. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic findings in two cases of
feline malignant fibrous histiocytoma. J Small Anim
Pract 37:239, 1996.
363. Pace LW, et al: Immunohistochemical staining of feline malignant fibrous histiocytomas. Vet Pathol 31:
168, 1994.
364. Pires MA: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma in a puppy.
Vet Rec 140:234, 1997.
365. Thoolen RJMM, et al: Malignant fibrous histiocytomas in dogs and cats: An immunohistochemical study.
Res Vet Sci 53:198, 1992.
366. Waters CB, et al: Giant cell variety of malignant fibrous histiocytoma in dogs: 10 cases (1986~1993). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1420, 1994.

Plasmacytoma
367. Baer KE, et al.: Cutaneous plasmacytomas in dogs: A
morphologic and immunohistochemical study. Vet
Pathol 26:216, 1989.
368. Clark GN, et al: Extramedullary plasmacytomas in
dogs: Results of surgical excision in 131 cases. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 28:105, 1992.
369. Eastman CA: Plasma cell tumors in a cat. Feline
Pract 24:26, 1996.
370. Frazier KS: Analysis of DNA aneuploidy and C-myc
oncoprotein content of canine plasma cell tumors using flow cytometry. Vet Pathol 30:505, 1993.
371. Kyriazidou A, et al: An immunohistochemical study of
canine extramedullary plasma cell tumours. J Comp
Pathol 100:259, 1989.

1412 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
372. Kyriazidou A, et al: Immunohistochemical staining
with neoplastic and inflammatory plasma cell lesions
in feline tissues. J Comp Patholl00:337, 1989.
373. Platz SJ, et al: Prognostic value of histopathological
grading in canine extramedullary plasmacytomas. Vet
Pathol 36:23, 1999.
374. Rakich PM, et al: Mucocutaneous plasmacytomas in
dogs: 75 cases (1980-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc
194:803, 1989.
375. Rowland PH, et al: Cutaneous plasmacytomas with
amyloid in six dogs. Vet Pathol 28:125, 1991.
376. Rowland PH, Linke RD: Immunohistochemical characterization of light-chain-derived amyloid in one feline and five canine plasma cell tumors. Vet Pathol
31:390, 1994.
377. Schrenzel MD, et al: Leukocyte differentiation antigens in canine cutaneous and oral plasmacytomas. Vet
Dermatol 9:33, 1998.

Me/anocytic Tumors
378. Anderson WI, et al: Pilar neurocristic melanoma in
four dogs. Vet Rec 123:517, 1988.
379. Berrington AJ, et al: Immunohistochemical detection
of melanoma-associated antigens on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded canine tumors. Vet Pathol 31:455,
1994.
380. Bolon B, et al: Characteristics of canine melanomas
and comparison of histology and DNA ploidy to their
biologic behavior. Vet Pathol 27:96, 1990.
381. Bostock DE: Prognosis after surgical excision of canine melanomas. Vet Pathol 16:32, 1979.
381a. Burkhart CG, Burkhart CN: Melanoma and insecticides: Is there a connection? J Am Acad Dermatol
42:302, 2000.
382. Day MJ, Lucke VM: Melanoeytie neoplasia in the eat.
J Small Anim Pract 36:207, 1995.
383. Diters RW, Walsh KM: Cutaneous clear cell melanomas: A report of three eases. Vet Pathol 21:355, 1983.
384. Frese K: Verlaufsuntersuchungen beim Melanomen
der Haut und der Mundschleimhaut des Hundes. Vet
Pathol 15:461, 1978.
385. Goldschmidt MH, et al: Feline dermal melanoma: A
retrospective study, In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds): Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New
York, 1993, p 285.
386. Goldschmidt MH: Pigmented lesions of the skin. Clin
Dermatol 12:507, 1994.
387. Harvey HJ, et al: Prognostic criteria for dogs with
oral melanoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:580,
1981.
387a. MacEwen EG, et al: Adjuvant therapy for melanoma
in dogs: results of randomized clinical trials using
surgery, liposome-encapsulated muramyl tetrapeptide,
and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor. Clin Cancer Res 5:4249, 1999.
387b. Mayr B, et al: Cytogenetic alterations in feline melanoma. Vet J 159:97, 2000.
388. Miller WH Jr, et al: Feline cutaneous melanocytic
neoplasms: A retrospective analysis of 43 cases
(1979-1991). Vet Dermatol 4:19, 1993.
388a. Modiano JF, et al: The molecular basis of canine
melanoma. J Vet Intern Med 13:163, 1999.
389. Oliver JL, et al: Isolation and characterization of the
canine melanoma antigen recognized by the murine
monoclonal antibody IBF9 and its distribution in cultured canine melanoma cell lines. Am J Vet Res 58:
46, 1997.
390. Ritt MG, et al: Functional loss of p21lWaf-1 in a ease

of benign canine multicentric melanoma. Vet Pathol
35:94, 1998.
390a. Roels S, et al: PCNA and Ki67 proliferation markers
as criteria for prediction of clinical behaviour of melanoeytic tumours in cats and dogs. J Comp Pathol
121:13, 1999.
390b. Valentine BA, et al: Malignant transformation of a
giant congenital pigmented nevus (hamartoma) in a
dog. Vet Dermatol 10:127, 1999.
391. van der Linde-Sipman JS, et al: Cutaneous malignant
melanomas in 57 eats: Identification of (amelanottc)
signet-ring and balloon cell types and verification of
their origin by immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and in situ hybridization. Vet Pathol 34:31,
1997.

Neuroendocrine Tumor
392. Glick AD, et al: Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
skin in a dog. Vet Pathol 20:761, 1983.
393. Konno A, et al: Immunohistochemical dtagnosts of a
Merkel cell tumor in a dog. Vet Pathol 35:538, 1998.
394. Nickoloff BJ, et al: Canine neuroendocrine carcinoma. A tumor resembling histiocytoma. Am J Dermatopathol 7:579, 1985.
395. Whiteley LO, Leiningen JR: Neuroendocrine (Merkel) cell tumors of the canine oral cavity. Vet Pathol
24:570, 1987.

Transmissible Venereal Tumor
396. Amber EI, et al: Single-dmg chemotherapy of canine
transmissible venereal tumor with cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, or vincristine. J Vet Intern Med 4:144,
1990.
396a. Boscos CM, et al: Cutaneous involvement of TVT
in dogs: a report of two cases. Canine Pract 24:6,
1999.
397. Das AK, et al: A clinical report on the efficacy of
vincristine on canine transmissible venereal sarcoma.
Indian Vet J 68:575, 1991.
398. Goswami TK, et al: Lyrnphokine activated killer cell
activity in transmissible venereal tumour of a castrated dog. Indian Vet J 74:895, 1997.
399. Harmelin A, et al: Correlation of Ag-NOR protein
measurements with prognosis in canine transmissible
venereal tumour. J Comp Pathol 112:429, 1995.
400. Marchal T, et al: Immunophenotype of the canine
transmissible venereal tumour. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 57:1, 1997.
401. Mozos E, et al: Immunohistochemical characterization of canine transmissible venereal tumor. Vet
Pathol 33:257, 1996.
402. Nandi SN, et al: Effect of ovariectomy on regression
of transmissible venereal tumour in bitches. Indian J
Vet Pathol 12:97, 1988.
403. Panchbhai VS, et al: Use of autogenous vaccine in
transmissible canine venereal tumour. Indian Vet J
67:983, 1990.
404. Perez J, et al: Immunohistochemical study of the local inflammatory infiltrate in spontaneous canine
transmissible venereal tumour at different stages of
growth. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 64:133, 1998.
405. Rogers KS: Transmissible venereal tumor. Comp
Cont Educ Pract Vet 19:1036, 1997.
406. Rogers KA, et al: Transmissible venereal tumor: a
retrospective study of 29 cases. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 34:463, 1998.
406a. Santos FGA, et al: Caracterizacao e quantificacno de
regi6es organizadoras de nucleolos coradas pela prata
(AgNORs) em tumor venereo transmissivel canino,

Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors • 1413
genital e extragenital. Arq Bras Med Vet Zootec 50:
665, 1998.
407. Singh J, et al: Clinicopathological studies on the effect of different antineoplastic chemotherapy regimens on transmissible venereal tumours in dogs. Vet
Res Commun 20:71, 1996.
407a. Singh TP, Pangawkar GR: Hemostatic disorders in
dogs infected with transmissible venereal tumour. Indian Vet J 75:879, 1998.

Epithelioid Sarcoma
408. Estrada MM, et al: Epithelioid sarcoma in a dog. J
Comp Pathol 107:107, 1992.

Secondary Skin Neoplasms
409. Anderson WI, et al: Presumptive subcutaneous surgical transplantation of a urinary bladder transitional
cell carcinoma in a dog. Cornell Vet 79:263, 1989.
410. Couto CG, Sousa C: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
with cutaneous involvement in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 22:374, 1986.
411. Crowe DT, Todoroff RJ: Umbilical masses and discolorations as signs of intraabdominal disease. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:295, 1982.
412. Estrada M, Lagadic M: Metastases digitales d'un carcinome pulmonaire asymptomatique chez Ie chat.
Etude d'une serie de 1I cas. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 27:791, 1992.
413. Gilson SD, Stone EA: Surgically induced tumor seeding in eight dogs and two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
196:1811, 1990.
414. Hampson ECGM, et al: Cutaneous metastasis of a
colonic carcinoma in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 31:
155, 1990.
415. Jacobs TM, Tomlinson MJ: The lung-digit syndrome
in a cat. Feline Pract 25:31, 1997.
416. Leifer CE, Matus RE: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
in the dog: 22 cases (1974-1984). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 189:214, 1986.
417. Muller A, et al: Metastases cutanees chez les carnivores domestiques. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 33:
267, 1998.
418. Scott-Moncrief JE, et aI: Pulmonary squamous cell
carcinoma with multiple digital metastases in a cat. J
Small Anim Pract 30:696, 1989.
418a. Spugnini EP, et al: Seminoma with cutaneous metastasis in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:253, 2000.
419. Susaneck SJ, et al: Inflammatory mammary carcinoma
in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:971, 1983.
420. White SD, et al: Cutaneous metastases of a mammary
adenocarcinoma resembling eosinophilic plaques in a
cat. Feline Pract 15:27, 1985.

Paraneoplastic Syndromes
420a. Cohen PR: Paraneoplastic dermatopathology. Cutaneous paraneoplastic syndromes. Adv Dermatol 1I:
215, 1996.
420b. Cuaguere E, et al: Lesions cutanees associces it des
maladies internes chez Ie chien. Prat Med Chir Anim
Comp 32:275, 1997.

Cysts
420c. Chaitman J, et al: Multiple eyelid cysts resembling
apocrine hidrocystomas in three Persian cats and one
Himalayan cat. Vet Pathol 36:474, 1999.
421. Clark DM, et al: Branchial cyst in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 194:67, 1989.
422. Davidson HJ, Blanchard GL: Periorbital epidermal
cyst in the medial canthus of three dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 198:271, 1991.

423. Fatone G, et al: Dermoid sinus and spinal malformations in a Yorkshire terrier: diagnosis and follow-up. J
Small Anim Pract 36:178, 1995.
424. Fezer G, Weiss E: Die zystischen Bildungen in der
Haut der Haustiere. Arch Exp Veterinarmed 23:60,
1969.
425. Joffe DJ: Branchial cyst in a cat. Can Vet J 31:525,
1990.
426. Lambrechts N: Dermoid sinus in a crossbred Rhodesian ridge back dog involving the second cervical vertebra. J S Afr Vet Assoc 67:155, 1996.
427. Parker WM: Multiple (more than two thousand) epidermal inclusion cysts in a dog. Can Vet J 36:386,
1995.
428. Penrith ML: Dermoid sinus in a Boerboel bitch. J S
Afr Vet Assoc 65:38, 1994.
429. Rochat MC, et al: Dermoid cysts in cats: two cases
and a review of the literature. J Vet Diagn Invest 8:
505, 1996.
430. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Cutaneous trichilemmal
cysts in three dogs. Cornell Vet 81:245, 1991.
431. Scott DW, Anderson WI: Cutaneous hybrid cyst in
four dogs. Cornell Vet 81:19, 1991.
432. Selcer EA, et al: Dermoid sinus in a Shih tzu and a
boxer. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:634, 1984.
433. Vilafranca M, et al: Generalized apocrine cystomatosis
in an Old English sheepdog. Vet Dermatol 5:83,
1994.

Nevi
434. Aronsohn MG, Carpenter JL: Distal extremity melanocytic nevi and malignant melanomas in dogs. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:605, 1990.
435. Atlee BA, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis in German
shepherd dogs as a marker for renal cystadenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:481, 1991.
436. de Geyer G: Dermatologie des paupieres du chien et
du chat. Premiere partie: etude generale. Prat Med
Chir Anim Comp 28:605, 1993.
437. Gilbert PA, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and renal
cystadenoma in a German shepherd dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:253, 1990.
438. Cuaguere E, et al: Dermatofibrose nodulaire chez le
Berger allemand: Etude retrospective de 10 cas. Prat
Med Chir Anim Comp 31:21I, 1996.
439. Jones BR, et al. Cutaneous collagen nodules in a dog.
J Small Anim Pract 26:445, 1985.
440. Kraft I, Frese K: Histological studies on canine pigmented moles. J Comp Pathol 86:143, 1976.
441. Marks SL, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and renal
cystadenomas in a golden retriever. Vet Dermatol 4:
133, 1993.
442. Mays MBC, et al: Regional collagenous nevi in three
dogs: Nevus, nodular dermatofibrosis, or something
new? In: Ihrke PJ, et al (eds.). Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon Press, New York,
1993, p. 315.
443. Moe L, Lium B: Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in 51
German shepherd dogs. J SmaIl Anim Pract 38:498,
1997.
443a. Nell B, et aI: Nodulate Dermatofibrose und renales
Zystadenokarzinom bei einem Schafer hundmischling.
Wien Tierarztl Mschr 85:123, 1998.
444. Paradis M, Scott DW: Naevi recemment reconnus
chez Ie chien: Naevus comedonien, naevus organorde
lineaire et naevus du follicule pileux. Point Vet 21:
489, 1989.
445. Perry W: Generalized nodular dermatofibrosis and re-

1414 • Neoplastic and Non-Neoplastic Tumors
nal cystadenoma in a series of 10 closely related
German shepherd dogs. Aust Vet Pract 25:90, 1995.
446. Roudebush P, MacDonald JM: Mucocutaneous angiomatous hamartoma in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 20:168, 1984.
446a. Scarampella F, et al: Linear organoid nevus in a
dog. Vet Dermatol11:69, 2000.
447. Scott DW, et aI: Nevi in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 20:505, 1984.
448. Sugai Y, et aI: Portwine stain nevus in a dog. Jpn J
Vet Dermatol 4:29, 1998.
448a. Toussaint S, et aI: Benign epidermal proliferations.
Adv Dermatol 14:307, 1999.
449. Vilafranca M, et aI: Chromophilic-eosinophilic (oncocyte-like) renal cell carcinoma in a dog with nodular
dermatofibrosis. Vet Pathol 31:713, 1994.
450. Walder EJ, Gross TL: Focal adnexal dysplasia (folliculosebaceous hamartoma). In: Ihrke PJ, et aI (eds.).
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology II. Pergamon
Press, New York, 1993, p. 311.
451. White SD, et al: Nodular dermatofibrosis and cystic
renal disease in three mixed-breed dogs and a boxer
dog. Vet Dermatol 9:119, 1998.
452. Weipers WL, Jarrett WFH: Haemangioma of the
scrotum of dogs. Vet Rec 66:106, 1954.
453. White SD, et aI: Inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevus in four dogs. Vet Dermatol 3:107, 1993.

Keratoses
454. Anderson WI, et al: Idiopathic benign lichenoid keratosis in the pinna of the ear in four dogs. Cornell Vet
79:179, 1989.
455. Bensingnor E, Carlotti DN: Keratose solaire chez
deux chiens nus. Point Vet 27:263, 1995.
456. Center SA, et aI: Multiple cutaneous horns on the
footpads of a cat. Feline Pract 12:26, 1982.
457. Goldschmidt MH, Kunkle G: Inverted follicular keratosis in a dog. Vet Pathol 16:374, 1979.
458. Komari S, et al: Four cases of cutaneous horns in the
footpads of feline leukemia virus-negative cats. J Jpn
Vet Med Assoc 51:27, 1998.

Mucinosis
459. Dillberger JE, Altman NH: Focal mucinosis in dogs:
Seven cases and a review of cutaneous mucinoses of
man and animals. Vet Pathol 23:132, 1986.

Calcinosis Circumscripta
460. A1haidari Z: La calcinose circonscrite du chien: 11 propos de deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30:339,
1995.
461. Anderson WI, Scott DW: Calcinosis circum scripta in
a domestic short-haired cat. Cornell Vet 77:348, 1987.
462. Berrocal A, et aI: Calcinosis circumscripta in two cats.
Feline Pract 20(3):9, 1992.
463. Bohmer E, et aI: Calcinosis cutis der Ballen bei einer
Katze. Tiertirztl Prax 19:88, 1991.
464. Davidson EB, et aI: Calcinosis circum scripta of the
thoracic wall in a German shepherd dog. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:153, 1998.
465. Gardner DE, et aI: Calcinosis circum scripta-like lesions in dogs associated with use of choke chains. N
Z Vet J 23:95, 1975.
466. Ginel P, et aI: Calcinosis circum scripta associated
with medroxyprogesterone in two poodle bitches. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:391, 1992.
467. Ginel PJ, et al: A further case of medroxyprogesterone acetate associated with calcinosis circum scripta in
the dog. Vet Rec 136:44, 1995.
468. Gross TL: Calcinosis circumscripta and renal dysplasia in a dog. Vet Dermatol 8:27, 1997.
469. Jackson HA, Barber PJ: Resolution of metastatic calcification in the paws of a cat with successful dietary
management of renal hyperparathyroidism. J Small
Anim Pract 39:495, 1998.
470. Joffe DJ: Calcinosis circumscripta in the footpad of a
dog. Can Vet J 37:161, 1996.
471. Kirby BM, et aI: Calcinosis circumscripta associated
with polydioxanone sutures in two young dogs. Vet
Surg 18:216, 1989.
472. Lewis DG, Kelly DF: Calcinosis circumscripta in
dogs as a cause of spinal ataxia. J Small Anim Pract
31:36, 1990.
473. Rewerts JM, et al: Idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta
causing lameness in a husky. Iowa St Univ Vet 56(1):
23, 1994.
474. Scott DW, Buerger RG: Idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta in the dog: A retrospective analysis of 130
cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:651, 1988.
475. Stampley A, Bellah JR: Calcinosis circum scripta of
the metacarpal pad in a young dog. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 196:113, 1990.

Chapter

21
Dermatoses of Pet Rodents,
Rabbits, and Ferrets

O

wn er complaints relative to skin problems in pet rodents, rabbits, and ferrets are
commonly encountered in small animal practice.v" 10-12, 16-20 Although much has
been written about the dermatoses of the commonly kept exotic mammals, the material is
often anecdotal or difficult to interpret. In particular, therapeutics in exotic animals is
controversial because few of the drugs commonly used are approved for use in these
species. In addition, because most treatments have evolved through a hit-and-miss approach, there are great discrepancies in the literature concerning what drugs to use and at
what dose to administer them. Over 300 references on these small "exotic" mammals were
listed in the fifth edition of this text.!?
Special caution is indicated with the use of antibiotics, because death due to direct
toxic effects or alteration of the normal bacterial flora is common-:" 7a, 9, 14, 15 Especially in
the guinea pig and rabbit, antibiotics that specifically affect gram-positive organisms are
contraindicated, and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be used. In rabbits and rodents, it
is important to use "four-quadrant" antibiotic coverage, drugs that are effective against
aerobic, anaerobic, gram-positive, and gram-negative bacteria. 10. 15 The safest drugs are the
fluoroquinolones, trimethoprim-sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, and metronidazole.i- 10, 15
One drug that is commonly used in these species and that appears to be safe and
effective in all ages is ivermectin." 10, 17 The standard dose is 300 to 400 /Lglkg given
subcutaneously and repeated every 2 weeks until the disorder being treated is cured. It
has also been reported that ivermectin is effective topically (one or two drops applied
between the scapulael.Fv "
Special precautions must also be observed when using topical medications. First,
these animals routinely remove topical agents through their grooming behaviors. Second,
these small creatures are prone to hypothermia after shampooing and dipping, Thus,
aqueous solutions should be kept at body temperature, and the animals must be kept
warm and dry and away from drafts after treatment. Avoid alcohol-based sprays. In
addition, inhalation/aspiration pneumonia is a potential problem. Thus, the face is best
avoided when dips are administered.
The structure and function of small exotic mammal skin are similar to those described
in Chapter 1,17 Hair growth in rodents (not guinea pigs) and rabbits occurs in periodic
orderly waves originating on the ventrum between the front legs and spreading dorsally
and caudally. In some rabbits, thickened patches of skin can be associated with the
variation in hair growth cycles. This is more common in young rabbits and becomes less
obvious with increasing age. The mean thickness in these patches is 2 mm as compared
with 1 mm in normal skin. Histologic examination of the patches reveals increased size of
hair follicles and increased vascularity. Notable histologic differences include (1) the
absence of epitrichial sweat glands in rodents and (2) the structure of the tail epithelium
of the mouse and rat, which features orthokeratosis with a stratum granulosum at the
follicular osia and parakeratosis without a stratum granulosum in the interfollicular areas.
Hamsters have large glands on either flank, which are visible as dark brown patches
that are more prominent in male animals. These flank or hip glands are sebaceous and are
used for marking territory. In sexually aroused males, the haircoat over the glands becomes matted from secretions and readily visible, and the animals scratch the areas as if
1415

1416 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

they are pruritic. These findings may be interpreted as signs of skin disease by some
owners. Gerbils have a yellowish tan, midventral scent gland, which is also sebaceous,
more prominent in male animals, and occasionally mistaken as a cutaneous abnormality.
Rabbits have a mental or chin gland (which is sebaceous in nature) with which they mark
their territory, Normal ferrets typically have visible accumulations of brownish cerumen
around the external auditory meatus. In addition, normal ferrets can have several comedones on the tail.
Most rodents are burrowing animals that spend most of their time in the wild seeking
food and escaping predators. When they are placed in sterile environments with ad
libitum feeding and no danger of predators, they are left with little to do except to chew
on themselves or on others. In addition, male rodents tend to be territorial and aggressive.
Self-inflicted trauma or that inflicted on cagemates can be triggered or amplified by
crowding.
Some other normal behaviors may be misinterpreted as pruritus. A rabbit rubbing its
mental, or chin, gland on a cage or furniture is only marking its territory. Likewise, a
guinea pig scooting or dragging its perineal area on the ground is usually scent-marking,
although in some male animals, the glandular secretions can become impacted and cause
irritation. Male hamsters may clean and fuss with their flank glands.
Staphylococci, especially Staphylococcus aureus , are frequently isolated from the skin,
the ears, the nostrils, and the haircoat of rodents and rabbits." 11, 17 Not surprisingly, S.
aureus is a common opportunist and cause of skin infections in these species.
Finally, these small creatures, especially mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rabbits, are
frequently used for studying models of human diseases (e.g., hereditary hypotrichoses and
ichthyoses in mice and rats), for examining the pathogenesis of various dermatoses also
seen in humans (e.g., contact hypersensitivity and candidiasis in guinea pigs), for evaluating therapeutic agents used in various human dermatoses (e.g., treatment of Malassezia
dermatitis in guinea pigs and the use of retinoids in rhino mice), for studying percutaneous absorption and various aspects of dermatopharmacology (e.g., the mouse tail assay for
studying epidermal drug effects), and for screening the potential irritancy or sensitization
of topical agents (e.g., the guinea pig Draize test for contact allergens and the rabbit skin
test for topical irritants)."

• CHINCHILLA
In the wild, chinchillas keep their haircoats clean and healthy by bathing in fine volcanic
dust.!? A similar dust is commercially available (chinchilla dust, or Fuller's earth) and
should be provided daily." 10, 17, 21 The dust is poured 5 to 10 ern deep in a metal pan and
left in the animal's cage for about 30 minutes. Chinchillas deprived of their dust baths are
prone to abnormalities of the haircoat and skin. Chinchillas kept in a warm (warmer than
80°F) humid environment develop matted fur.

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is uncommon in chinchillas." 4,17,22 Trichophyton mentagrophytes is the
most frequent cause, but Microsporum gypseum and M, canis are occasionally isolated.
Lesions are most common around the eyes, the nares, and the mouth, but may occur
anywhere. Circumscribed areas of alopecia, broken hairs, and variable degrees of scaling,
erythema, and crusting are seen. Secondary staphylococcal infection can occur and usually
presents as cellulitis or abscess.P
Recommended therapy includes griseofulvin by mouth (50 mglkg q24h) for 30
days.!": 22 It had previously been recommended to add captan powder to a clean dust bath
once daily.22 However, because captan has been shown to be ineffective against M. canis
(see Chap. 5), the authors cannot recommend it.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1417

Fur Chewing
Chinchillas may chew, pull out, and eat their fur during times of stress (gestation, travel,
and shows), in the absence of dust baths, and for unknown reasons.v 10, 17,21,22 When the
fur chewing is idiopathic, it rarely ceases, It is believed that the idiopathic condition is a
heritable trait, that no therapy is effective, and that the condition is best controlled by
culling and selective breeding. 10. 17,21 Providing fresh alfalfa hay, giving proper chinchilla
pellets, and reducing stress may help.

Fur-Slip
Fur-slip is a normal physiologic process whereby chinchillas appear to "squirt" or "shoot"
some of their fur out.F: 22 This is a mechanism of self-defense in which the chinchilla
hopes to leave a predator with a mouthful of fur as it escapes. Fur-slip is likely to occur
when chinchillas are frightened or handled roughly. Chinchilla fur grows in tufts with up
to 90 fibers per follicle and up to 1000 follicles/cm.v P Fur-slip affects spots 2 to 5 em in
diameter. Fur regrowth occurs within 3 months for some follicles and usually takes 5
months for an entire spot. However, regrowth is rarely a perfect fit and always looks
patched.

Nutritional Disorders
Fatty acid deficiency results in generalized scaling, poor haircoat, reduced hair growth,
and perhaps cutaneous ulcers in the chinchilla.v "
Zinc deficiency may produce alopecia."

• FERRET
Ferrets have active sebaceous glands that contribute to their distinctive odor and somewhat greasy feeling coat. Occasional small, red-brown waxy deposits can be found on
normal skin. During breeding season, intact males have increased sebaceous secretions, to
the point of having a yellowish discoloration of the undercoat, a very oily fur, and quite a
musky odor. Frequent bathing may strip essential oils from the skin, resulting in keratinization disorders and pruritus.!? Owners should be encouraged to use mild shampoo no
more frequently than once monthly, if possible.

Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are uncommon in the ferret and are usually caused by S. aureus
or Streptococcus spp." Infections are usually secondary to bite wounds (especially on the
neck of female ferrets during breeding season, perpetrated by aggressive male animals as
a prelude to coitus) or the pruritus associated with ectoparasites. There may be superficial
and follicular (Fig. 21-1) lesions or deep abscesses and fistulae, Staphylococcal or streptococcal cellulitis of the neck may be associated with dental disease and mandibular osteomyelitis.F' Diagnosis is based on cytologic examination. Treatment consists of a regimen of
various combinations of topical antimicrobials (3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% to 1%
chlorhexidine), surgical drainage, and the administration of systemic antibiotics (Table
21-1).
Actinomycosis ("lumpy jaw") is rarely reported in ferrets.!" 28 Affected animals have
nodules or abscesses in the neck, and fistulae and discharge of thick green-yellow pus may
be seen.

"See references 4, 6, 15, 17, 24, 25, 30.

1418 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-1. Superficial bacterial folliculitis in a ferret. Multiple
crusted papules and patchy hair loss
over dorsal midline.

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis appears to be rare in ferrets." M. canis and T. mentagrophytes are the
most common causes, and young animals are most frequently affected. Lesions consist of
annular areas of alopecia, broken hairs, scale, and varying degrees of erythema and
crusting. Pruritus is usually absent. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of
affected hairs and fungal culture. Therapy consists of topical application of antifungal
agents and environmental clean-up as described for cats. Griseofulvin is usually not
needed. Dermatophytosis in ferrets is a potential zoonosis. Blastomycosis was diagnosed in
a ferret with chronic cutaneous plaques and ulcers. I? Histoplasmosis was diagnosed in a
"See references 3, 6, 10, 17, 24, 25, 28, 35.

• Table 21-1

COMMON THERAPEUTIC AGENTS IN SMALL
MAMMALS

AGENT

PROTOCOL

Antibiotics
AmoxiciIlin
Ampicillin
Cephalexin
Chloramphenicol succinate
Chloramphenicol palmitate
Ciprofloxacin
Doxycycline
Enrofloxacin
Gentamicin
Metronidazole
Sulfadiazine-trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprtm
Tetracycline hydrochloride

10-20 mg/kg SC or PO q12h (ferret, mouse, rat)
5-10 mg/kg SC or PO q12h (ferret, mouse, rat)
15-25 mg/kg PO q12h
50 mg/kg 1M or SC q12h
50 mg/kg PO q12h
5-15 mg/kg PO q12h
5-10 mg/kg PO or SC q24h
5-20 mg/kg PO or SC q12h
5 mg/kg 1M or SC q24h
20 mg/kg PO q12-24h
15-30 mg/kg SC q24h
15-30 mg/kg PO q12h
20 mg/kg SC or PO q12h

Antifungals
Griseofulvin
Antiparasitics

25-50 mg/kg PO q24h

Amitraz 250 ppm
Ivermectin
Lime sulfur 2%

Total body dip q2wk
0.3-0.4 mg/kg SC q2wk
Total body dip q7d

1M, intramuscularly; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1419

ferret with multiple subcutaneous nodules." Coccidioidomycosis was diagnosed in a ferret
with a persistent draining tract of the stifle.27
An outbreak of otitis extema and pinnal necrosis in association with mites (Otodectes?)
and yeast (Malassezia?) infection was reported." A painful, rapidly progressing crusting and
necrosis of the pinnae spread, if untreated, onto the face. Mites and yeast were found in
smears. Histopathologic findings included suppurative epidermitis, numerous surface yeast,
and hemorrhagic necrosis with thrombosis. Treatment with ketoconazole (50 mg/ferret,
q24h, per os) and a polypharmaceutical otic preparation was rapidly effective.

Ectoparasites
Otodectic mange (ear mites) is common in ferrets. 10, 17, ,38 Affected ferrets may manifest no
clinical signs or variable degrees of excessive cerumen production. Pruritus, inflammation,
and secondary bacterial infection are uncommon. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding Otodectes cynotis in ear swabs. Treatment is accomplished with topical acaricides or topical
ivermectin (500 JLg/kg divided between the two ears);'? Injectable ivermectin is the
treatment of choice. In one study,35a topical treatment with either Tresaderm (2 drops in
ears q24h for 7 days, sequence repeated after a week of no treatment) or ivermectin
(Ivomec diluted 1: 10 in propylene glycol; 400 JLg/kg divided equally in both ears, repeated in 2 weeks) was more effective than the subcutaneous administration of ivermectin
(400 JLglkg, repeated in 2 weeks). Ivermectin should be used with caution in pregnant
jills.l" 25. 28 When ivermectin was administered at 2 to 4 weeks of gestation, an increased
incidence of congenital defects, such as cleft palates, was seen. However, when ivermectin
was administered after 4 weeks of gestation, no problems were noted.
Fleas (especially Ctenocephalides felis felis) are commonly found on ferrets.'? Animals
may be asymptomatic or have cutaneous reaction patterns similar to flea bite hypersensitivity in cats. Ferrets manifesting presumed flea bite hypersensitivity have a pruritic
papulocrustous dermatitis over the rump, ventral abdomen, and caudomedial thighs, or a
self-induced, symmetric alopecia over the rump, flanks, ventral abdomen, or medial thighs
(fur-mowing) in which the skin appears normal. Treatment strategies must include the
ferret; in-contact ferrets, cats, and dogs; and the environment, as described for cats.
Fipronil spray has been found to be safe and effective for ferrets."
Sarcoptic mange is uncommon in ferrets and has two clinical presentations: (1)
intense pruritus and dermatitis over the face, the pinnae (Fig. 21-2A), and the ventrum
and (2) pruritic pododermatitis. 10. 17 In the pododermatitis form, the feet are swollen,
erythematous, and crusted, and the claws may be dystrophic. Affected ferrets may actually
slough claws or digits. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding Sarcoptes scabiei mites in skin
scrapings. However, mites can be extremely difficult to find, so response to miticidal
therapy is often used as a diagnostic procedure. Treatment includes 2% lime sulfur dips
(weekly until 2 weeks after clinical cure) or ivermectin injections.
Demodicosis was reported in two unrelated ferrets that were living in the same
household and receiving long-term treatment with a glucocorticoid-containing otic ointment.P' The ferrets exhibited excessive cerumen in the ears and pruritus, alopecia, comedones and orange discoloration of the skin behind the ears and on the ventrum. Skin
scrapings and ear smears revealed numerous short mites that resembled Demodex gatoi.
Amitraz dips were curative, and no side effects were reported.
Ferrets housed outdoors may occasionally have cysts, abscesses, or fistulae in the neck
associated with infestation by Hypoderma sp. or Cuterebra sp. larvae. 10, 17 Treatment
includes careful surgical removal of the larva and routine wound care.
Flystrike (especially Wohlfahrtia vigil) can be a problem for commercial ferret ranchers and outdoor ferrets." Eggs are commonly laid on the face, neck, and flanks of young
ferrets, causing irritation and subcutaneous abscesses.
Ticks may occasionally be found on ferrets, especially around the head and the ears.!?
Treatment is as described for cats.
Ferrets can be experimentally infected with Dracunculus insignis and have been used
as an animal model for studying dracunculiasis.t? Lesions consist of tender swellings,
which abscess and develop fistulae. Lesions occur most commonly on the legs.

FIGURE 21-2. A, Alopecia, crusts, and excoriations on the pinnae of a ferret with sarcoptic
mange. B, Mast cell tumor on the lower jaw of a ferret. C, Sebaceous epithelioma on the shoulder
of a ferret. D, Squamous cell carcinoma on the lip of a ferret. (Courtesy of W. Gould.) E, Alopecia,
crusting, and ulceration of the nose of a gerbil with "sore nose." F, Squamous cell carcinoma of the
ventral scent gland in a gerbil. (Courtesy of W. Gould.) G, Staphylococcal pododermatitis in a
guinea pig. (Courtesy of J. King.) H, Alopecia and thick crusts over the dorsum in a guinea pig with
trixacariasis. (Courtesy of E. Cuaguere.)

1420

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1421

Viral Infections
The ferret is susceptible to canine distemper virus." 6, 10, 17 Typical cutaneous findings
include an erythematous rash under the chin and in the inguinal region; swelling and
brownish crusts on the chin, lips, nose, and the periocular area; and swollen, hyperkeratotic nose and footpads (Fig. 21-3). Some ferrets develop an orange-tinged dermatosis on
the anus and inguinal region.

Endocrine Disorders
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
Adrenocortical neoplasia and hyperplasia are the most common causes of progressive
bilaterally symmetric alopecia in the ferret. 10, 37, 39a, 41, 43 Two authors indicated that this
disorder accounted for about 25% of all the ferrets examined in their practice.v The
condition was initially diagnosed as Cushing's syndrome. However, other classic clinical
signs (polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia) and hematologic, biochemical, or urologic
abnormalities associated with Cushing's syndrome are rarely present. In addition, basal
plasma cortisol levels are usually within the normal range and adrenal function tests
(adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH] stimulation, dexamethasone suppression) have not
been useful in separating normal from diseased ferrets.l" 17, 37, 39, 43 The contralateral

FIGURE 21-3. Young ferret with canine distemper virus infection. A, The eyes are encrusted
shut with mucopurulent exudate. B, Dermatitis,
excoriations, and crusting around the lips and
chin; hyperkeratosis of the footpads. C, Dermatitis in the inguinal area. (From Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE: Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents:
Clinical Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia, 1997.)

1422 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

adrenal gland is not atrophied. These considerations in concert with the common occurrence of vulvar enlargement in affected female ferrets and return to male sexual behavior
in castrated male ferrets suggested that the endocrine abnormality was in the adrenocortical production of sex hormones." Median plasma concentrations of 17-hydroxyprogesterone, androstenedione, and estradiol are Significantly higher in ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism than in normal ferrets." Ninety-six percent of affected ferrets had a high
concentration of at least one of these three hormones, but only 22% had high concentrations of all three hormones. These concentrations decreased after adrenalectomy.
The etiology of hyperadrenocorticism in ferrets is unknown, but several hypotheses
have been put forth. 10, 43 Early neutering may lead to metaplasia of undifferentiated
gonadal cells in the adrenal capsule, In a Dutch study, a Significant linear correlation was
found between the age at neutering and the age at the time of diagnosis,42a Hyperadrenocorticism in ferrets is common in the United States, but apparently rare in the United
Kingdom, suggesting that diet (prepared foods in the United States, whole prey in the
United Kingdom), photoperiod (housed indoors in the United States, outdoors in the
United Kingdom), and genetics (U,S, population more inbred) may also playa role,
Clinical signs are seen between 2 and 8 years (average 4) of age and with equal
frequency in females and males. In most cases, clinical signs are first noted in the spring.
The initial abnormality is usually a bilaterally symmetric, noninflammatory alopecia that
usually begins on the tail and tail base (Fig. 21-4) and progresses to the ventral abdomen,
caudomedial thighs, dorsal surface of hind paws, lumbosacral region, and shoulder blades.
In some animals, the alopecia may come and go. In such cases, clinical signs appear in the
spring and spontaneously regress in the autumn. However, clinical signs recur with increasing severity each spring and eventually persist.l? 17, 43 Most affected males and
females have a strong musky odor. Vulvar enlargement is common in female animals (Fig.
21-5), as is return to male sexual behavior in castrated males. In more chronic cases, the
back of the neck, top of the head, and trunk become alopecic, and the body skin becomes
thin and hypotonic (Fig. 21-6). About 9% to 30% of affected ferrets are reported to have
varying degrees of pruritus, mostly over the dorsum between the shoulder blades. 10, 43, 43a
When present, pruritus is often severe and unresponsive to glucocorticoids and antihistamines. Numerous comedones are occasionally found on the tail, and phlebectasias may be
seen. Lethargy, muscle atrophy, splenomegaly, and return to male behavior (in neutered
males) occur in about 63%, 56%, 87%, and 15%, respectively, of the cases.f Mammary
gland hyperplasia has been reported, and stump pyometras are not uncommon. Stranguria
may be present in up to 19% of affected males. 43a The enlarged adrenal gland can be
palpated in about 30% of cases.

FIGURE 21-4. Alopecia of the
tail in a ferret with an adrenal adenoma,

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1423

FIGURE 21-5. Symmetric alopecia and vulvar
enlargement associated with an adrenal adenoma
in a ferret. (Courtesy of W. Gould.)

FIGURE 21-6. Truncal alopecia
and hypotonic skin (note exaggerated
wrinkling) in a ferret with an adrenal
adenoma.

1424 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
Diagnosis is usually confirmed by ultrasonographic examination or exploratory laparotomy.lO· 17. 23 Ultrasonography may fail to diagnose about 50% of the cases and may not be
cost-effective in a practice situation." In rare instances, the adrenal glands appear normal
on both ultrasonographic examination and exploratory laparotomy.t- 43 Urinary cortisol:
creatinine ratios were Significantly higher in ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism than in
normal ferrets.P However, this is not specific for hyperadrenocorticism, and affected
ferrets can have normal ratios.v'
Eighty-four percent of affected ferrets have unilateral adrenal tumors, whereas 16%
have bilateral adrenal tumors." Of the unilateral tumors, over 80% are in the left adrenal
gland. 17. 43. 43a Histologically, 56% of the tumors are nodular hyperplasia, 27% are adenocarcinomas, 16% are adenomas, and 1% are "normal."43 All tumors larger than 1 ern
diameter were adenocarcinornas.v In 47% of the patients with bilateral tumors, each
gland had a different histologic type of tumor.s- 43a All male ferrets with a return of male
sexual behavior had adenocarcinomas."
In one study,43 27% of the ferrets with hyperadrenocorticism had concurrent insulinomas. This emphasizes the importance of performing a complete exploratory.
The "adrenal panel" (Clinical Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Comparative
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, 615-974-5638) may give diagnostic
results in 96% of the cases.s" However, results are not always diagnostic, and the test may
not be cost-effective in a practice situation.f- 43a
In most animals, the treatment of choice is unilateral adrenalectomy. 10. 17,43 Clinical
improvement is evident within 2 to 8 weeks, and complete recovery is usually seen within
5 months. Hair regrowth usually occurs in the opposite direction to which it was lost. In
two cases in which a unilateral adrenalectomy was performed and no hair growth had
occurred for 6 to 8 months, a secondary exploratory revealed tumors on the remaining
adrenal.P Seventeen percent of the animals with unilateral tumors develop tumors on the
remaining adrenal, resulting in a recurrence of clinical signs within 14 months." Ferrets
with bilateral adrenal tumors should have the largest adrenal gland completely removed,
along with 50% to 60% of the other one (subtotal bilateral adrenalectomyi.v- 43a Even
following subtotal bilateral adrenalectomy, 15% of the ferrets had recurrence of clinical
signs within 7 to 22 months.f>
Medical treatment has been used, usually unsuccessfully, when surgery could not be
performed, or when, after surgical removal of a neoplastic adrenal, the remaining adrenal
gland also became neoplastic and clinical signs recurred.!? Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) has been
used at 50 mg orally, once daily for 7 days, then every 3 days until clinical cure.
Administration of the drug is then stopped. If clinical signs recur, o,p'-DDD is given at a
weekly maintenance dose of 50 mg. To facilitate administration, the o,p'-DDD is mixed
with com starch and 50-mg doses are put in gelatin capsules. However, mitotane is rarely
effective.!" 43a Ketoconazole has been ineffective when given orally at 15 mglkg every 12
hours. 1O• 43a
Anecdotal reports indicate that leuprolide (Lupron, TAP Pharmaceuticals), when given
at 100 JLglkg subcutaneously, every 21 days, is very effective for the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in ferrets. Response is usually seen by the third injection and is complete by
6 months. Once maximum response is achieved, the interval between injections is extended. Ferrets with aggressive adrenal carcinomas may not respond.

HYPERESTROGENISM
Hyperestrogenism is well recognized in the female ferret.l" 17.24.28 However, this disorder
is rare because large-volume ferret breeders are neutering and descenting the animals at 6
weeks of age. An ovarian remnant may be suspected in a neutered female with signs of
estrus. Jills allowed to remain in estrus during the breeding season are susceptible to the
toxic effects of estrogen on bone marrow. Affected jills develop pancytopenia and varying
degrees of alopecia. Clinical signs accompanying the pancytopenia include pale mucous
membranes, petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhages, anorexia, depression, and weight loss.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1425

FIGURE 21-7. Alopecia of the
trunk and tail in a jill with hyperestrogenism.

The alopecia is bilaterally symmetric, beginning on the tail, the perineum, the abdomen,
the medial thighs, and the rump and progressing cranially (Fig. 21-7). Vulvar enlargement is a constant finding. Untreated animals die of infectious or hemorrhagic complications. Treatment is often unrewarding. Ovariohysterectomy; intravenous blood transfusions; administration of dexamethasone, anabolic steroids, and systemic antibiotics; and
supportive care have rarely been reported to result in recovery, but transfusions may need
to be repeated several times for 3 to 5 months.!" 17. 24. 28

ALOPECIA ASSOCIATED WITH TESTICULAR NEOPLASIA
Testicular neoplasia is rare, because most large-volume breeders neuter male ferrets at 6
weeks of age. A sparse haircoat and a bald tail were reported in association with an
interstitial cell carcinoma of the testicle in one ferret.!? Total body alopecia and pruritus
were reported in association with a testicular Sertoli's cell neoplasm in another ferret.'?

BREEDING SEASON ALOPECIA
Breeding season alopecia is commonly seen, especially in the female and less frequently in the male ferret, during the period of sexual activity from March through
August. 5 , 10. 17. 28, 41 Photoperiod plays an important role in this condition, because even
neutered ferrets are affected. Bilaterally symmetric alopecia affects the tail, the perineum,
the ventral abdomen, the rump, and occasionally, the periocular region and the paws.
Affected ferrets are otherwise healthy, and spontaneous hair regrowth occurs in the fall.

SHEDDING
Seasonal shedding is seen in spring and early summer.f- 17, 28, 41 Variable degrees of
hypotrichosis or alopecia may be seen over the trunk and resolve spontaneously within a
month or two.

TELOGEN DEFLUXION
Telogen defluxion is occasionally seen 2 to 3 months after a stressful circumstance (high
fever, severe illness, surgery, and anesthesial.l"' 41 Bilaterally symmetric hypotrichosis or
alopecia is most prominent on the trunk (Fig. 21-8).

1426 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-8. Telogen defluxion.
Patchy alopecia of the dorsal trunk.
(Courtesy of M. Paradis.)

HYPOTHYROIDISM
Although anecdotal reports suggest that hypothyroidism is a common cause of endocrinelike alopecia in ferrets," the authors and others 10, l7 have never made such a diagnosis, and
know of no documented cases. Some data have been published on basal serum thyroxine
and triiodothyronine levels and thyroid function tests in normal ferrets. l7 • 28

Miscellaneous Conditions
Some authors believe that the most common cause of alopecia and dull, dry haircoat in
ferrets is poor dietary practices." Food passage averages 3 to 4 hours in ferrets; thus, diets
high in protein and fat but low in fiber are important. A low-fat diet may result in a dry,
dull haircoat. 10
Biotin deficiency (from excessive feeding of raw eggs) can result in bilaterally symmetric alopecia in ferrets." 24, 25, 28
Severe intestinal parasitism (especially Toxascaris leonina) can produce variable degrees of hair loss and scaling in ferrets."
Contact dermatitis can occur with frequent use of shampoos or insecticide sprays.P
Focal areas of alopecia have been seen at the site of previous injections.P
The authors have seen an occasional ferret with presumptive atopy. Affected animals
manifested symmetric, nonlesional pruritus over the trunk, the rump (Fig. 21-9), and the
paws. Fleas were not present, hypoallergenic diets were ineffective, and response to
glucocorticoids or chlorpheniramine was good. One of the authors (WHM) has seen one
food-hypersensitive ferret with the same clinical signs. The ferret was normal when fed a
commercial hypoallergenic diet for cats (Innovative Veterinary Diets [IVD] venison).
Erythema annulare centrifugum was reported in a ferret with hyperadrenccorticism."
Parallel linear bands of erythema were present over the dorsolateral lumbosacral area and
encircling the tail (Fig. 21-10). The dermatitis disappeared after 20 days of treatment
with a commercial omega 3/omega 6 fatty acid-containing product (Derm Caps).
The blue ferret syndrome is an unusual idiopathic condition affecting ferrets of either
sex, neutered or intact." The abdominal skin shows bilaterally symmetric bluish discoloration. Affected ferrets are asymptomatic. The condition regresses spontaneously during a
few weeks. In the authors' experience, this condition is most commonly seen in ferrets
that have been clipped for surgery or to provide access to veins during the resting phase
of the hair cycle. The clipped area remains hairless for a long time, then suddenly begins
to tum blue. It appears that hair follicles are making melanin, which will be incorporated

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1427

FIGURE 21-9. A, Self-induced alopecia over the rump of a ferret
with a pruritic dermatosis resembling atopy. B, Same ferret. Self-induced hypotrichosis of hind paw.

into growing hairs. Soon after the ferret's skin turns blue, hair regrowth begins (within 1
to 2 weeks).
Self-inflicted facial excoriations (burrowing) may be seen in ferrets that have inadequate bedding, nesting material, or hiding spots.'? Intact females may pull out hair to use
as bedding.'?

Neoplasia
Skin neoplasms are fairly common in the ferret, and the majority are benign. lO, 17 In one
large survey." the skin was the third most common site for primary neoplasms in ferrets
(about 13% of all neoplasms). One of the most frequent of these is the mast cell tumOLlO, 17, 33 Lesions may be solitary or multiple and may come and go over time. Mast cell

FIGURE 21- 10. Erythema annulare centrifugum in a ferret with
hyperadrenocorticism, Multiple parallel bands of erythema and scale
encircle the tail and involve the
dorsal lumbosacral area.

1428 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

tumors present as papules or nodules (see Fig. 21-2B), which vary from skin colored to
yellow, brown, or red. They may be firm, soft, or cystic. Some lesions are pruritic. Lesions
may occur anywhere, but are most commonly reported on the neck and dorsal trunk.
Similar to the situation in cats, most cutaneous mast cell tumors in the ferret are
benign.P: 17
Basal cell tumors and sebaceous gland neoplasms (especially on the head, neck, limbs,
tail and the shoulder [see Fig. 21-2C)) are also common in ferrets.!" 17,33 Most previously
diagnosed "basal cell tumors" were probably sebaceous epitheliomas.l? Epitrichial sweat
gland carcinomas (especially on the tail and the groin), chondromas (especially on the tail),
chondrosarcomas (especially on the tail), and squamous cell carcinomas (especially on the
digit and the lip [see Fig. 21-2D)) have also been reported on numerous occasions.Fv'"
Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma was reported in an 8-year-old ferret with a 4month history of progressive alopecia and pruritic dermatitis." The ferret had generalized
alopecia and erythema, excoriations, erosions, crusts, and ulcerated plaques on the head,
trunk, limbs, paws, footpads, and tail. The nasal planum and footpads were depigmented,
and the claws were onychogryphotic. Isotretinoin (2 mglkglq 24h, per os) produced a
marked improvement after 60 days, but the ferret was euthanized due to renal failure
associated with pyelonephritis.
Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in ferrets include papilloma, fibroma, fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, histiocytoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, neurofibroma, neurofibrosarcoma, myxoma, myxosarcoma, ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma,
lymphoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. 0
The treatment of choice for cutaneous neoplasms is surgical excision.

• GERBIL
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections, usually associated with S. aureus, are common in gerbils. 7 , 8, 17
These infections are virtually always secondary to other perhaps less obvious conditions,
especially trauma (cage-related injuries and bite wounds), ectoparasite infestations, and
accumulated harderian gland secretions.v 8 Infections resulting from cage-related injury
are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle (from rubbing on the cage and equipment
or burrowing in abrasive litter), whereas those caused by bite wounds typically occur
around the head, the tail, the rump, and the perineal area. Those secondary to accumulated harderian gland secretion typically begin on the nose and the periocular area." 8
Staphylococcal infections may be superficial (alopecia, erythema, oozing, crust, and scale)
or deep (abscess, fistula, and ulcer), and are usually nonpruritic.
Treatment of bacterial dermatitis includes some combination of eliminating predisposing causes, daily topical cleaning with a 3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% to 1% chlorhexidine, and administration of systemic antibiotics (see Table 21-1).

Ectoparasites
Demodicosis has rarely been reported in gerbils. 6, 17 Lesions occurred on the face, the
thorax, the abdomen, and the limbs and were characterized by alopecia, oozing, crusts,
scales, and secondary bacterial infection. Demodex merioni was isolated in skin scrapings.
Details concerning pathogenesis and treatment are presently unpublished.
A dermatosis associated with Acarus farris was reported.v' Alopecia, scaling, and
thickening of the skin began on the tail, spread to the hind paws, then to the head.
Pruritus and excoriation were seen with chronicity. Ivermectin injections were ineffective,
but environmental changes (decreased humidity, new litter, new food) and a single application of fipronil spray were curative.
"See references 6, 10, 17, 28, 32, 33, 40.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1429

Barbering
Although gerbils tolerate crowding better than do most rodents, they chew or "barber" the
hair of cagemates," 8 The affected areas appear clipped or shaved, and rarely are any
actual skin lesions present. The dorsum of the tail and the top of the head are most
frequently involved.

Bald Nose and Sore Nose
Bald nose describes a clinical condition common to the gerbil, which is characterized by
alopecia on the muzzle and the dorsum of the nose." 6, 8, 15, 17 There are usually no skin
lesions. The alopecia has been attributed to mechanical trauma associated with rubbing
against cages and cage equipment, and burrowing in abrasive bedding. Placing animals in
a smooth-sided enclosure or aquarium with soft bedding such as shredded paper may be
curative.
Bald nose may also be an early stage of the nasal dermatitis (sore nose [see Fig. 212E]) associated with accumulated harderian gland secretion." 6, 8,17,19 These secretions are
rich in porphyrins and accumulate about the nasal and facial areas, and apparently lead to
the development of an irritant contact dermatitis and secondary staphylococcal infection.
The animal's failure to groom the areas adequately leads to irritation, which can then lead
to self-inflicted trauma and secondary infection. The stress of overcrowding and high
humidity may contribute to the development or the severity of the condition. This condition is common in research colonies and commercial breeding colonies.
The earliest clinical sign is the accumulation of a reddish brown discharge and crust
around the nose, the lips, and less frequently, the eyes. This porphyrin-rich secretion
exhibits an orange fluorescence when viewed under ultraviolet light (Wood's light). There
is frequently protrusion of the nictitans. This is followed by alopecia and, if not treated,
dermatitis, pruritus, and secondary staphylococcal infections. Lesions can then spread to
the paws, the legs, and the ventrum.
Therapy consists of topical or systemic antibiotic therapy for secondary staphylococcal
infection, if present, and housing with access to sand. Surgical removal of the harderian
gland is effective but less practical.s 17

Miscellaneous Conditions
An occasional litter of gerbils is born with abnormalities of hair growth and pigmentation," 17 Typically, the back is completely bald, the surrounding haircoat is thinned or
patchily alopecic, and the haircoat shows profound leukotrichia. The majority of affected
animals fail to thrive and die at the time of weaning. Surviving gerbils develop a normal
haircoat as they mature. The etiopathogenesis of this condition is unknown.
The ventral scent gland in gerbils can become inflamed from being rubbed against
wood chips or other abrasive bedding.' In addition, impaction of these glands can lead to
self-mutilation. 4
When relative humidity is greater than 50%, the normally sleek and smooth gerbil
haircoat often appears greasy and stands out." Pine shavings can also cause this appearance."
A gerbil's tail skin is very thin, and easily peels off.15 If the tail skin is lost, the
exposed tail becomes necrotic and sloughs off. 10, 16 Alternatively, the bare tail can be
surgically removed where the skin stops.

Neoplasia
The skin is the second most common site of neoplasms in gerbils. 6, 17 Skin neoplasms are
typically seen in aged animals (2 to 4 years of age). The most commonly reported skin
neoplasms in the gerbil are melanocytomas and melanomas (especially of the paw and the
pinna),5, 16 sebaceous gland adenomas (especially of the ventral scent gland),6, 17 and

1430 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

squamous cell carcinoma (especially of the ventral scent gland [see Fig. 21-2F] and the
pinna)." 17. 45 Other reported skin neoplasms in gerbils include papilloma, fibrosarcoma,
and neurofibroma." 17
Diagnosis of skin neoplasms is based on exfoliative cytologic study or biopsy, and the
treatment of choice is surgical excision.

• GUINEA PIG

Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are common in guinea pigS.2-11. 17 These infections are virtually
always secondary to other factors, especially trauma (cage-related injuries and bite
wounds) and ectoparasites. Those secondary to bite wounds are typically found around the
head, the tail, the rump, and the genital area and are associated with S. aureus. Abscesses
are occasionally associated with Corynebacterium kutscheri, Streptococcus zooepidemicus
(especially abscesses on the neck), Streptobacillus moniliformis, or Yersinia pseudotuberculosis,": 6, 8. 17 A staphylococcal cellulitis characterized by thickening and hyperkeratosis of
the lips was associated with feeding of tough, fibrous hay.!" Treatment of these infections
includes elimination of predisposing factors, surgical drainage, daily topical applications of
3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% chlorhexidine, and systemic antibiotic administration (see
Table 21-1).
An exfoliative dermatitis resembling staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome was reported in a guinea pig colony, chiefly among female animals in the late stages of gestation.!? Bacterial contamination and the abrasive effects of rusty cage floors were suggested
as initiating factors. Alopecia was first noted on the ventral abdomen. After a few days, the
skin became acutely erythematous and painful. Affected skin subsequently fissured and
large thick flakes were desquamated. The condition spontaneously resolved after a course
of 10 to 14 days. S. aureus was isolated from the skin, the pharynx, the trachea, and nasal
washings of affected animals. Skin biopsies revealed intragranular acantholysis and cleavage within the epidermis with minimal inflammation. An exfoliative toxin produced by the
staphylococci was reported to cause the skin lesions.
The most common skin disease associated with S. aureus infection (occasionally
Corynebacterium pyogenes) in the guinea pig is pododermatitis (bumble foot).2-11. 17
Predisposing factors include trauma to the footpad, poor sanitation, obesity, aging, and
vitamin C deficiency, Affected animals react vigorously when the feet are palpated. The
footpad is markedly enlarged, edematous, and erythematous (see Fig. 21-2G). Crusts,
ulcers, and hemorrhages may be present on the volar surfaces. In chronic or severe cases,
the disease process extends to phalangeal and metatarsal or metacarpal bones and joints.
Most guinea pigs with pododermatitis have a poor prognosis, because treatment is difficult
and systemic amyloidosis is a frequent consequence of chronic infection. Pododermatitis
can be prevented by frequently cleaning cages and changing bedding, using cages with
smooth surfaces, instituting individual weight control, and providing routine foot care.
Early lesions may respond to management changes and daily topical therapy (povidoneiodine or chlorhexidine scrubs, soaks, and ointments under a bandage). Extensive infections also necessitate systemic antibiotics (see Table 21-1).

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is common in guinea pigs and is almost always caused by T. mentagrophytes. lO , 17 This dermatophyte can be isolated from the skin and haircoat in approximately
15% of clinically normal guinea pigs. I, 1.3. 17, 53. Rarely, other dermatophytes, such as M.
canis, M. gypseum, M. audouinii, and T. oerrucosuni can cause disease in guinea pigS.16
Lesions typically begin as scaling, broken hairs, and alopecia on the nose, which spread to
the periocular, forehead, and pinnal areas. In severe cases, the dorsal lumbosacral area is
also affected (Fig. 21-11), but the limbs and the ventrum are usually spared. Pruritus is

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1431

FIGURE 21-11. M. canis infection in a guinea pig. Alopecia and
erythema of lateral abdominal and
shoulder regions. (Courtesy of E.
Cuaguere.)

usually minimal or absent. Some animals have more inflammatory lesions characterized by
erythema, follicular papules, pustules, crusts, and pruritus. Diagnosis is confirmed by
microscopic examination of affected hairs and fungal culture. Treatment is usually accomplished with the topical application of antifungal agents (2% lime sulfur, 1 % chlorhexidine,
or 0.2% enilconazole dips weekly until the animal is cured).2-11. 17 Griseofulvin is not
usually needed, but can be given at 25 mg/kg every 24 hours orally until the animal is
cured. 2-1O• 16 The administration of griseofulvin should be avoided in pregnant animals ..s, 16
Dermatophytosis in guinea pigs is an important zoonosis.!?
Cryptococcosis was reported in a single guinea pigY The animal had a plaque on the
dorsum of the nose, which became crusted and ulcerated, and spread into the nostrils.
Skin biopsy was diagnostic, and the animal was euthanized.
Guinea pigs have been used as an experimental model for studying the pathogenesis
of cutaneous candidiasis.,52 Skin lesions are readily produced by the application of Candida
albicans under occlusion and consist of erythema, pustules, oozing, and crusts.
Guinea pigs have also been used as an experimental model for studying the pathogenesis and treatment of Malassezia dermatitis.P Skin lesions are readily produced by the
application of inocula of Malassezia (Pityrosporum) ovale and consist of erythema, edema,
crusts, and scales.

Viral Infections
Hairless guinea pigs have been used as an experimental model for studying the pathogenesis of recurrent herpes simplex infection." Intracutaneous inoculation of herpes simplex
virus produces pustules and crusts, which spontaneously resolve and can be reactivated by
local trauma.
Poxvirus-like virions were demonstrated during the electron microscopic examination
of specimens from two guinea pigs with a chronic, crusting cheilitis."?

Ectoparasites
Trixacarus (Caviacoptes) caviae is a burrowing sarcoptiform mite and, arguably, the most
common cause of ectoparasitic skin disease of guinea pigs. 10. 17.50.51 Trixacariasis is always
the first differential diagnostic suspect in intense pruritus in guinea pigs. The mite is
similar to S. scabiei in appearance but is smaller in size (average, 175 ILm in length), and
the female mite has a dorsal rather than terminal anus. T. caviae is similar in size and
appearance to Notoedres spp. but differs by lacking prominent, sharp, dorsal cuticular

1432 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-12. Legend on opposite page

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1433

spines. The areas most commonly affected include the dorsal neck and the thorax (see
Fig. 21-2H), but in severe cases, the entire body may be involved (Fig. 21-12A).
Early clinical signs include pruritus, erythema, and traumatic alopecia. Chronic lesions
include lichenification, hyperplgmentation, crusts, thick, whitish to yellowish scales (see
Fig. 21-12B), and brittle, easily epilated hair. The extreme irritation and self-mutilation
cause lethargy, anorexia, progressive emaciation, and death associated with bacterial infection or immune-mediated renal disease. Hyperesthesia, behavior such as furiously running
in circles and blindly walking into objects, and seizures can be seen and may be triggered
by examining the affected animal. Resorption of fetuses and abortion may be seen in
breeding animals. Diagnosis may be confirmed by skin scrapings (Fig. 21-13A), but it is
not unusual for these to be negative. Treatment consists of 2% lime sulfur dips (once
weekly until cure is achieved) or ivermectin injections. Orally administered ivermectin is
not effective in guinea pigS.5 1• T. caviae can temporarily infest humans, producing a
pruritic papular dermatitis in areas contacted by the guinea pig (arms, thighs, and abdomen).
Chirodiscoides caviae is the guinea pig fur mite.l" 17,48 Infestation is uncommon, and
clinical disease is probably rare. Heavy infestations can cause pruritus, alopecia, erythema,
scaling, and crusting, especially on the dorsolateral lumbosacral area (see Fig. 21-13C)
and the perineum. Diagnosis is confirmed by the microscopic identification of the mites
(see Fig. 21-13B), which are often found attached to hair shafts. Treatment is as described for lice. Although injections of ivermectin have been reported to eliminate C.
caoiae.» 10, 17 others found this form of therapy to be ineffectlve.v
Other mites rarely reported to affect guinea pigs and produce clinical syndromes
characterized by pruritus and dermatitis, which is most prominent on the face, the pinnae,
and the dorsum, include S. scabiei, Notoedres muris, and Myocoptes musculinus.P Diagnosis and treatment are as described for T. caviae infestation.
Lice are commonly encountered in guinea pigs. 10, 17 The guinea pig may be parasitized by two different biting lice, with Gliricola porcelli (the slender guinea pig louse) (see
Fig. 21-13C) being much more frequently encountered than Gyropus ovalis (the oval
guinea pig louse). Trimenopon hispidum is a biting louse rarely isolated from guinea
pigs. 49 Most infestations occur without clinical signs, but heavy infestations may produce a
roughened, disheveled haircoat, scaling, crusting, alopecia, and pruritus, especially around
the ears and over the dorsum (see Fig. 21-12D). Heavy infestations are more commonly
encountered in young animals and those with decreased resistance and under poor management. Diagnosis is confirmed by gross or microscopic visualization of lice or nits.
Treatment can be accomplished with pyrethrin- or pyrethroid-containing flea powders or
sprays approved for cats, 2% lime sulfur dips, or ivermectin lnjections.s" 10, 17 Cage
sanitation is important.
Pelodera dermatitis is rarely reported in guinea pigsP Affected animals have ventral
dermatitis consisting of erythema, papules, oozing, crusts, and alopecia. Skin scrapings and
skin biopsy reveal the presence of the nematode Pelodera strongyloides. Removing contaminated bedding and maintaining a clean, dry cage environment are curative.
Cheyletiellosis is rarely reported in guinea pigs. 17 Affected animals have scaling and
variable degrees of hypotrichosis and pruritus on the dorsum. Skin scrapings reveal the
mite Cheyletiella parasitivorax. Treatment is as described for rabbits.
Demodicosis is rare in guinea pigsP Lesions occur most commonly on the trunk (Fig.

FIGURE 21-12. A, Alopecia, erythema, and thick, yellowish crusts on the ventrum of a guinea pig with trixacariasis.
(Courtesy of E. Cuaguere.) B, Close-up of the thick, yellowish crusts on the skin of a guinea pig with trixacariasis. C,
Chirodiscoides caviae infestation in a guinea pig. Note the uneven, clipped appearance of the haircoat over the caudal half
of the body. D, Pediculosis in a guinea pig. Numerous nits can be seen over the face and neck. (Courtesy of J. King.) E,
Trichofolliculoma in a guinea pig. Hyperpigmented, ulcerated tumor over the dorsal lumbar area (Courtesy of W. Gould.)
F, Epitheliotropic lymphoma in a hamster. Generalized alopecia, erythema, scaling, and exaggerated folds of skin. G, Severe
self-inflicted alopecia and ulceration over the ear, neck, and shoulder in a mouse with M. musculi infestation. (Courtesy of
W. Gould.) H, Alopecia, erythema, crusts, and ulcers on the ventral neck of a rabbit with Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection.

1434 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

21-14) and consist of alopecia, erythema, papules, and crusts. Pruritus is variable. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding numerous Demodex caviae mites in skin scrapings (see Fig.
21-13D). Amitraz dips (250 ppm, every week until 4 weeks after skin scrapings are
negative) are reported to be an effective treatment.
Fleas (C. felis) and ticks may be rarely encountered on guinea pigs. 6. 17 Treatment is
the same as that described for cats.

Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies, other than vitamin C deficiency, are unlikely to be encountered in
pet guinea pigs. Experimental production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnormalities have been reported and are briefly mentioned here. Protein deficiency
produces generalized alopecia.v 17 Fatty acid deficiency results in generalized alopecia,
scaling, and dermatitis.s 17 Pyridoxine deficiency produces alopecia, scaling, and dermatitis,
which is most prominent on the limbs, the face, and the pinnae.v 17 Vitamin C deficiency
is associated with cutaneous petechiae, ecchymoses, hematomas, generalized scaling, and a
rough, unkempt hatrcoat.v 3. 8, 17 Vitamin C deficiency is common and is most commonly
seen in animals being fed a commercial rabbit chow or an outdated commercial guinea
pig chow as the sale diet or in anorectic animals,

FIGURE 21-13. Ectoparasites. A, Trixacarus caviae (Courtesy of K, Thoday.) B, Chirodiscoides caviae. C, Gliricola
porcelli. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) D, Demodex caviae (Courtesy of D. Carlotti.) E, Myobia musculli. F, Myocoptes
museulinus. G, Psoroptes. H, Lisirophorus gibbus. (B, E to G from Bowman DO: Ceorgis' Parasitology for Veterinarians,
7th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, 1999.)
Figure continued on opposite page

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1435

FIGURE 21-13. Continued

1436 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-13. Continued

FIGURE 21-14. Alopecia and erythema over
the back of a guinea pig with demodicosis.
(Courtesy of D. Carlotti.)

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1437

Miscellaneous Conditions
Telogen defluxion is frequently seen in the last trimester of pregnancy or during lactation. 6, 8, 17 The alopecia is most prominent on the lumbosacral area and the flanks.
Marked shedding during stress is common in guinea pigs.3 When guinea pigs are sick,
it is often easy to epilate an entire area of haircoat when tenting the skin.
Guinea pigs establish male-dominated social hierarchies, and animals of low social
ranking or young animals may lose considerable amounts of hair, especially on the head,
the rump, the perineum, and the prepuce owing to barbering or receiving bite wounds.v "
17. 19 Ear chewing can be a problem, resulting in ear margin notches or actual cropping
close to the head. Guinea pigs may also self-barber, producing hair loss in only those
areas that they can reach with their mouth (the fur on the head, the neck, and the
anterior shoulders is intact). Hair loss due to barbering appears irregular in length and
clipped. The underlying skin is usually normal in appearance. In some cases, the addition
of long-stemmed hay resolves the barbering, suggesting that the cause was boredom or a
need for fiber." 8, 17, 19
Necrosis of digits and paws is occasionally seen when owners put objects such as
cloths and socks in cages with guinea pigsY Segments of these materials become wrapped
around distal extremities and serve as constricting bands or tourniquets. Tissues distal to
the constriction become swollen and painful, then necrotic, and then they slough (Fig.
21-15).
Apparent ergot poisoning was characterized by the sudden onset of anorexia, lethargy,
and lameness." The feet became discolored, desiccated, insensitive to touch, and woodlike.
Thinning of the haircoat is common near the time of weaning in neonates and
spontaneously resolves." 17
Hereditary hairlessness has been reported in guinea pigs (Fig. 21-16),17 Bilaterally
symmetric alopecia over the flanks and trunk has been seen in guinea pigs with cystic
ovaries (Fig. 21-17).4, 10, 17 Affected females usually present with progressive enlargement
of the abdomen, and ovarian cysts may be palpable as discrete, large, rounded masses in
the dorsal middle abdomen. Ultrasonographic examination may be diagnostic." Ovariohysterectomy is curative.
Sebaceous glands are especially abundant around the anus, in the folds of the perianal
and genital regions, and in the dorsal sacral skin, especially in sexually mature male
animals." 10. 17 Excessive accumulations of sebaceous debris, and occasionally bedding
material and feces, may become entrapped in these folds or mat down the dorsal sacral

FIGURE 21-1 S. Necrosis and
slough of the hindfoot of a guinea pig
caused by a constricting band. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.)

1438 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-16. Congenital alopecia in a guinea pig. (Courtesy of J.
Gourreau.)

FIGURE 21-17. Truncal alopecia in a guinea
pig associated with bilateral cystic ovaries. The
cystic ovaries and uterus are on the right.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1439

haircoat. Intertrigo, secondary bacterial infections, and unpleasant odors may intervene in
this situation. These areas should be cleaned as needed with 3% hydrogen peroxide, 0.5%
chlorhexidine, or a mild astringent (aluminum subacetate) to prevent the aforementioned
sequelae.
Heavy guinea pigs, especially those maintained in wire-bottom cages, frequently develop hyperkeratosis and cutaneous horns of the footpads." 17 These horny growths are
most commonly observed on the ventral aspect of the front paws. They can be removed
with scissors and an emery file. Replacement of cage surfaces with smoother materials
retards or prevents further hyperkeratoses.
Overgrown claws are a frequent problem in pet guinea pigs. 3 , 17 Frequent examination
and trimming prevents traumatic and infectious complications.

Neoplasia
The skin is the second most common site of neoplasia in the guinea pig. 2, 3, 6, 8, 17 The
most common cutaneous neoplasm is the trichofolliculomaY This tumor is most commonly encountered as a benign, solitary lesion over the dorsal lumbar area (see Fig. 2112£). The overlying skin is usually alopecic and crusted. Frequently, a central pore is
seen, through which keratinous material or dark, hemorrhagic exudate is discharged.
Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in guinea pigs include sebaceous adenoma, fibroma,
fibrosarcoma, lipoma, liposarcoma, schwannoma, and lymphoma.v 17

• HAMSTER
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are uncommonly reported in hamsters. S, aureus and Pasteurella
pneurrwtropica have been recovered from isolated cases of skin abscesses and bite
wounds." 8 Hamsters are prone to periodontal disease and dental caries, and any facial
abscess located ventral or cranial to the eye may be a tooth root abscess.'? Treatment of
bacterial dermatitis includes elimination of predisposing causes, surgical drainage, daily
topical cleaning with 3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% chlorhexidine, and occasionally systemic antibiotic administration (see Table 21-1).
Experimentally, the hamster is susceptible to infection with Treponema pallidum
subsp. endemicum, the agent of endemic syphilis of humans." Intradermal injection of the
spirochete results in erythematous papules and ulcers, which eventually heal but are
followed by perioral ulcers and an erythematous maculopapular rash on the paws and the
trunk and death. This form of hamster syphilis has been proposed as a useful model for
the study of the immune response, antibiotic therapy, and vaccination techniques in
human venereal and congenital syphilis.

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is rare in hamsters and is caused by T. mentagrophytes. 2 , ,3. 6, 8, 16-19
Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of affected hairs and fungal culture.
Treatment is as described for the other rodents.

Ectoparasites
Demodicosis is the most common ectoparasitism of the hamster. 10, 17 Demodex criceti and
D. aurati are both normal residents of hamster skin.!? D. aurati is long and tapered
(average, 180 /Lm long) and inhabits hair follicles, whereas D. criceti is short and stubby
(average, 90 /Lm long) and inhabits the keratin and pits of the epidermal surface. Clinical
demodicosis is seen in aged hamsters, is usually associated with D. aurati, and is usually
associated with conditions that suppress immune responses (e.g., malnutrition, concurrent

1440 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
disease, cancer, and exposure to carcinogensj.v B, 17. 19 Lesions are most commonly seen
over the dorsal lumbosacral area but may be generalized (Fig. 21-18). Moderate to
severe alopecia is accompanied by variable degrees of scaling, erythema, and small hemorrhagic crusts. Pruritus is usually absent. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings. Treatment of demodicosis in hamsters has not been extensively evaluated or reported. The
authors and others 4, 19 were successful with 250 ppm of amitraz applied as a whole-body
dip once weekly until 4 weeks after skin scrapings are negative.
Notoedric mange is rarely reported in hamsters.f- 17, 19 Lesions are characterized by
thick yellowish crusts, erythema, and alopecia on the pinnae, the muzzle, the tail, the
genitalia, and the paws. Pruritus is severe, and self-mutilation can be extreme. Diagnosis is
confirmed by finding Notoedres sp. mites in skin scrapings. Treatment with 2% lime sulfur
dips (whole-body application weekly until two treatments after clinical cure) or ivermectin
injections is effective.
S. scabiei, T. caviae, and Ornithonyssus bacoti are reported to be rare causes of
pruritus and dermatitis in hamsters.'? Clinical signs, diagnosis, and treatment are the same
as that described for notoedric mange.
Fleas (C. felis felis) are rarely encountered on hamsters." Treatment is the same as
that described for cats.

Traumatic Alopecia and Dermatitis
Female hamsters are generally more aggressive than are males.v !" Aggressive behavior in
male hamsters is testosterone dependent and is markedly reduced by castration.v 17 The
establishment of social dominance among male hamsters is positively correlated with the
weight, size, and degree of pigmentation of the flank glands." Aggression-related bite
wounds are most commonly seen around the head, the tail, and the perineal area.
Aggression can produce severe wounding, such as the complete removal of the flank
glands of the victim.!"

FIGURE 21-18. Demodicosis in a hamster. A, Alopecia, scaling,
erythema, and lichenification on the head and neck. (Courtesy of G.
Kollias.) B, Demodex aurati in skin scraping.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1441

Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be seen in pet hamsters. However, one author"
indicates that hair loss in hamsters is associated most often with continuous feeding of low
protein (less than 16%) feed, such as is commonly found in pet stores. Experimental
production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnormalities have been
reported and are briefly mentioned here. Pantothenic acid deficiency produces exfoliative
dermatitis, depigmentation of the haircoat, and the accumulation of porphyrin-rich secretions around the nose, the mouth, and the eyes. 2, 17 Riboflavin deficiency produces alopecia, scaling, and dermatitis, which are most evident on the extremities.s 17 Pyridoxine
deficiency results in generalized alopecia and depigmentation of the haircoat.v 17 Niacin
deficiency produces a generalized alopecia.v 17 Fatty acid deficiency results in generalized
alopecia, scaling, and the production of profuse amounts of cerumen.v 17 Copper deficiency results in alopecia and depigmentation.f

Miscellaneous Conditions
Foreign body granulomas associated with bedding consisting of wood shavings and sawdust were reported on the paws and the shoulders of hamsters.!? The problem was
eliminated by using shredded paper as bedding.
Swelling and pruritus of the face and the paws has been reported in several hamsters." In all instances, owners had recently purchased a fresh bag of cedar or pine
shavings produced by a leading pet company or bulk shavings from landscaping or nursery
outlets. When affected animals were housed on plain newspaper, the lesions spontaneously
regressed. Presumably, the shavings had been treated with some chemical that produced a
contact dermatitis.
Hereditary hairlessness has been reported in hamsters.!?
Hyperadrenocorticism is rarely reported in hamsters.s 54 Clinical signs include bilaterally symmetric alopecia, hyperpigmentation, and thinning of the skin. The baseline plasma
cortisol value in one affected hamster was elevated (approximately twofold increase)
compared with that in one normal hamster. One hamster was treated with metyrapone (8
mg orally q24h for 1 month), and hair regrowth was complete after 12 weeks. A second
hamster was treated with o,p'-DDD (5 mg orally q24h for 1 month), then metyrapone as
described previously, and responded to neither drug. This hamster was euthanized, and a
chromophobe adenoma of the hypophysis and bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia were
found at necropsy.
The flank scent glands of the hamster can become inflamed from being rubbed
against wood chips or other abrasive cage equipment.' In addition, impaction of these
glands can lead to self-mutilation.'
Ringtail is occasionally seen in the hamster (see Rat in this chapter)." 17

Neoplasia
Skin neoplasms are rare in hamsters.v 6, 8, 17 The most frequently reported cutaneous
neoplasms are melanomas and melanocytomas.s 6, 17 These tumors occur much more
frequently in male hamsters and most commonly on the back, the head, the neck, and the
flank gland.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) is the second most common cutaneous
neoplasm of the hamster.s 17, 55 Affected animals have an exfoliative erythroderma (see
Fig. 21-12F), which is generally pruritic, and go on to manifest peripherallymphadenopathy, lethargy, anorexia, emaciation, and death. Some animals also have cutaneous plaques
and nodules (Fig. 21-19), which may become ulcerated and crusted. Light and electron
microscopic examinations demonstrated an epitheliotropic lymphoma in which many cells
show the typical features of Sezary cells." Immunohistochemical studies showed that the
neoplastic cells are T lymphocytes." Therapeutic trials have not been reported.

1442 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21- 19. Epitheliotropic
lymphoma in a hamster. Generalized
alopecia and multiple crusted nodules
and plaques.

Other cutaneous neoplasms reported in hamsters include basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, papilloma, epitrichial sweat gland adenoma, fibrosarcoma, and plasmacytoma.v 6,17

• MOUSE
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are uncommon in pet mice, are usually caused by S. aureus, and
are secondary to trauma (cage-related injuries and bite wounds) or self-inflicted (the
pruritus associated with ectoparasites)." 7, 8, 17, 19 Infections resulting from cage-related
injury are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle, whereas those associated with bite
wounds typically occur around the head, the tail, the rump, and the perineal area.
Staphylococcal infections may be superficial (alopecia, erythema, oozing, and crust) or
deep (abscess, fistula, necrosis, and ulcer) and are usually nonpruritic. Submandibular and
periorbital granulomas were associated with bacterial pseudomycetuna (botryomycosis) due
to S. aureusl? Other bacteria occasionally isolated from cutaneous abscesses and pyogranulomas in mice include Streptococcus sp., P. pneumotropica, Actinobacillus sp., Actinomyces sp., and Klebsiella.2 , 8, 17 Treatment of bacterial dermatitis includes some combination
of elimination of predisposing causes, surgical drainage, daily topical cleaning with 3%
hydrogen peroxide or 0.5% to 1% chlorhexidine, and systemic antibiotic administration
(see Table 21-1). Surgical excision may be the best treatment for abscesses."
S. rrwniliformis is a rare cause of epizootics of edema and cyanosis of the extremities.2, 8,17
C. kutscheri (murium) is a rare cause of epizootics of furunculosis and cutaneous
pyogranulomas, which may progress to necrosis and sloughing of extremities.v 8,17
The mouse has been used as an experimental model for staphylococcal scalded skin
syndrome. 17, 62
Mycobacterium chelonae infection caused nodular, granulomatous lesions on the tails
of immunocompromised mice. 54a

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is uncommon in mice and is usually caused by T. mentagrophytes. I - 6 , 13 ,
16-19 This dermatophyte can be isolated from the haircoat of up to 60% of clinically
normal mice in pet shops and represents an important zoonosis. Lesions are most commonly seen on the face, the head, the tail, and the trunk and consist of annular areas of

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1443
alopecia, broken hairs, scales, and variable degrees of erythema and crusting. Pruritus is
usually minimal to absent. Diagnosis and treatment are the same as that described for
guinea pigs.

Viral Infections
Mouse pox (infectious ectromelia) causes epizootics in research colonies but is rarely, if
ever, seen in practice.t- 3, 6-8, 17, 66 Skin lesions include a generalized papular dermatitis
with eventual swelling, necrosis, ulceration, and even sloughing of digits, pinnae, and tail.
Diagnosis is confirmed by skin biopsy, electron microscopic examination of crusts, viral
isolation of the orthopoxvirus, and polymerase chain reactionY· 65
Reovirus Type 3 infection of suckling mice causes severe illness and an oily haircoat.v 8,17 Animals that survive past weaning experience alopecia.
Sialodacryoadenitis virus infection causes eye rubbing and scratching, periorbital swelling, and red tears (chromodacryorrheal.vv 17

Ectoparasites
Myobia musculi is a mite commonly found on mice. 2 - 6 , 8,16-19 Some animals are asymptomatic carriers, whereas other animals show varying degrees of skin disease and pruritus.
Severely inflammatory and pruritic forms of the infestation are associated with genetic
susceptibility and mite-related hypersensitivity reactions.!" Immature mice or those that
are immunocompromised may be more susceptible to severe forms of the disease. Clinical
signs may be mild and include patchy alopecia, slight erythema, and minor scaling on the
head and the muzzle. Other mice may show intense pruritus and self-mutilation of the
face, the head, the pinnae, the neck, and the shoulders (see Fig. 21-12G). Severely
affected animals can become debilitated and die. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings (see Fig. 21-13E). The treatment of choice is subcutaneous injections of ivermectin.v 4, 17, 19, 71 Ivermectin administered topically or in drinking water is less effective :59. 60, 67, 69
Myocoptes musculinus is a mite commonly found on mice. 2 - 6 , 8 , 16-19 Some animals are
asymptomatic carriers, whereas others manifest varying degrees of skin disease and pruritus. Lesions are most severe on the back and the ventrum. Unlike the case with M,
musculi infestations, severe ulceration is not seen with M. musculinus infestations. Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings (see Fig. 21-13F); however, the mites are often difficult
to find. The treatment of choice is subcutaneous injections of ivermectin every 2 weeks
until the animal is cured." 4, 17, 19,71 Ivermectin administered topically or in drinking water
is less effective.P: 60, 67 Other mites that are rarely found on mice include Radfordia affinis, Psorergates simplex, 0. bacoti, S. scabiei, N. muris, and Trichoecius rom-

boutsi.i:" 8, 9, 17, 19
Fleas (especially C. felis felis) may be recovered from pet mice maintained in households frequented by dogs and cats. 2 - 6 , 8,17
The sucking louse Polyplax serrata is occasionally found on pet mice. 2 - 6 , 8, 9, 17, 19 Some
animals may be asymptomatic carriers, but others manifest varying degrees of dermatitis
and pruritus. Young animals, debilitated animals, and animals in poor management situations are more likely to be affected. Lice and related dermatoses are most commonly
found on the neck and back. Treatment can be accomplished with topical insecticides or
ivermectin injections.

Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet mice. Experimental production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnormalities have been reported
and are briefly mentioned here. Zinc deficiency produces exfoliative dermatitis, alopecia,
and depigmentation of the haircoat." 17 Pantothenic acid deficiency results in exfoliative
dermatitis and depigmentation of the haircoat.v 17 Riboflavin deficiency produces alopecia,
scaling, and dermatitis, especially on the extremities.v 17 Pyridoxine deficiency results in

1444 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

exfoliative dermatitis, especially on the face, the ears, the limbs, and the taiJ.2· 17 Biotin
deficiency causes exfoliative dermatitis." Fatty acid deficiency produces an exfoliative dermatitis.v 17

Miscellaneous Conditions
Male mice are aggressive. 2 - 6 • 8. 17. 19 Barbering and bite wounds are frequently seen,
especially on the muzzle, the whiskers, the face, the head, the rump, the tail, and the
perineum. These behaviors can be exacerbated by crowding, stress, and boredom. Mice
frequently rub the hair off the muzzle as they stick their face through slotted feeders or
wire bars.
Mice develop numerous types of hereditary hairlessness and keratinization defects,
which are probably never seen by the practitioner.v 8, 17. 68. 69 Some of these conditions
have been used as laboratory models for the study of various aspects of cutaneous
pathophysiology and pharmacology, such as ichthyosis, asebia, rhino, and blotchy (similar
to the Menkes kinky hair syndrome in humans) and flaky skin (similar to psoriasis in
humansi.I" 62. 63, 68. 73
Ringtail is rarely reported in mice (see Rat in this chapter)." 17 Idiopathic dry gangrene of the pinna is sporadically seen in young mice." 17 The incidence appears to
increase when the mice are exposed to cold temperatures and when the ears are traumatized by excessive grooming in attempts to remove lice. The condition progresses rapidly
from initial erythema of the distal one third of the pinna to necrosis and slough. Rarely,
the distal one third of the tail is also involved.
Perianal pruritus is seen in association with pinworms (Syphacia obvelata).2. 4, 8, 17, 19
Infected mice often mutilate the base of the tail. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic
examination of strips of cellophane (Scotch) tape that have been applied to the perineum.
The eggs of S. obvelata are banana shaped and about 30 /Lm by 150 /Lill. Treatment with
ivermectin injections is curative.
A spontaneous immune complex vasculitis was reported to affect up to 21% of certain
strains of aged mice." Mice developed multiple crusts between the scapulae or on the
dorsal neck. These lesions rapidly evolved into irregular ulcers and spread laterally and
caudally on the body. Pruritus was intense. Histologic examination revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis and IgG, IgM, and fibrinogen were demonstrated in dermal blood vessel
walls.
Alopecia areata was reported in the C3HIHej mouse and proposed as a model of the
human disease."

Neoplasia
Although mice are sensitive to the induction of various skin neoplasms by the topical or
systemic administration of chemical carcinogens or ultraviolet light exposure, spontaneous
skin neoplasms are rare.s 3, 6, 8, 17 The most commonly reported cutaneous neoplasms are
papilloma, squamous cell carcinoma, and fibrosarcoma. 17, 64 Other reported cutaneous
neoplasms include hair follicle tumors, sebaceous gland tumors, mast cell tumors, hemangiomas, hemangiosarcomas, melanomas, lymphomas, and a solitary epitheliotropic lymphoma resembling pagetoid reticulosis in humans.!": 57, 61

• RABBIT
Bacterial Infections
Pasteurellosis (snuffles) is the most common bacterial disease of the rabbit." Most rabbits
carry Pasteurella multocida asymptomatically in the nasal cavity, and under conditions of
'See references 2-5, 8, 10, 11, 17, 77, 80, 81, 86, 92, 96.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1445
stress, the bacteria multiply and cause disease. Subcutaneous abscesses develop as a result
of septicemia, external wound contamination, or direct extension from deeper sties. The
abscesses are variable in size, are usually firm on palpation, and are filled with a thick,
white to tan exudate. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of direct smears
of exudate and culture. In the rabbit, subcutaneous abscesses are due to pasteurellosis
until proven otherwise. Other causes of abscesses include S. aureus, Fusobacterium,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus sp., and C. pyogenes." Abscesses on the head may
be secondary to dental disease, a tooth root abscess, or an oral foreign body. 10
Abscesses in rabbits are typically filled with thick, caseated pus and are surrounded by
a thick capsule. These two attributes make the use of drainage, drains, and topical and
systemic antibiotics unsuccessful in most cases.v- 10, 15 The treatment of choice is surgical
excision and at least 2 weeks of antibiotic treatment (see Table 21-1).10, 15, 81 If this is
impossible, radical debridement, flushing, and antibiotics for several weeks may be effective.?" In some rabbits, abscesses continue to recur in the same spot or at some other sites
in an apparently healthy individual.'? Some of these rabbits may require lifetime antibiotic
therapy to prevent recurrences. 10
Necrobacillosis (Schmorl's disease) is a sporadic bacterial infection of rabbits caused
by Fusobacterium necrophorum. t It is characterized by inflammation, necrosis, ulceration,
and abscessation, especially on the face, the head, and the neck. Diagnosis is confirmed by
culture. Treatment is accomplished with surgical debridement, topical antimicrobial applications, and systemic penicillin or tetracycline administration.
P. aeruginosa causes a localized moist dermatitis (sore dewlap) and, occasionally,
subcutaneous abscess in areas of skin that are continuously wet. t The muzzle, the dewlap
(see Fig. 21-12H), the flank, and the haunches are most commonly involved. The affected skin is moist, erythematous, edematous, alopecic, and often ulcerated. The fur is
often clumped, creating a spiked appearance. The most striking clinical feature is the
blue-green color of the fur in animals with white fur, which is caused by a water-soluble
pigment (pyocyanin) produced by the bacteria. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic
examination of direct smears from oozing areas and culture. Treatment includes clipping,
gentle cleaning, and application of astringents (aluminum acetate) and topical gentamicin
sulfate ointment. Prevention is directed at removing the cause of continued wetness of the
fur. The most common cause is the constant drooling ("slobbers") associated with dental
disease.l" Leaking water valves or water bottles should be replaced. Water bowls or pans
should be replaced by water bottles with sipper tubes. Malocclusion of the teeth should
be corrected to prevent drooling. Wet bedding should be changed more frequently.
Ulcerative pododermatitis (sore hocks) is a common disorder in rabbits.§ Genetic
predilection is important, as large body size and thinner plantar fur pads are important
predtsposing factors. Unsanitary cage conditions, rough cage surfaces, and obesity also
contribute to pressure necrosis and secondary bacterial infection with S. aureus. Lesions
commonly occur unilaterally or bilaterally on the plantar aspect of the metatarsal region
or, less commonly, the volar surface of the metacarpal area. Focal inflammation, oozing,
crusts, and alopecia progress to ulcers, hemorrhage, and abscesses. In severe infections,
the disease may extend to the bony structures of the foot and result in septicemia.
Treatment includes correction of predisposing conditions, surgical drainage, topical antimicrobial applications, and systemic antibiotic administration (see Table 21-1). Severe cases
usually do not respond.
Venereal spirochetosis (treponematosis, rabbit syphilis, or vent disease) is uncommon. 2 - 6 , 7a, 10, 17,92,96 Treponema paraluis-cuniculi, the causative spirochete, is transmitted
by direct contact, especially mating. Cold environments appear to predispose to the
disease, Because of the grooming, social, and sleeping habits of rabbits, lesions are

·See references 2, 6, 8, 11, 17, 82, 92, 96.
"See references 2, 3, 7, 8, 17, 92, 96.
tSee references 2-6, 8, 10, 17, 92, 96.
ISee references 2-6, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.

1446 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

frequently seen on the nose (Fig. 21-20A), the lips, the chin, the face, the eyelids, the
ears, and the paws as well as the genitalia. Lesions consist of vesicles, papules, erythema,
edema, oozing, erosions, and brownish crusts. Focal ulcers and hemorrhage may be seen.
Diagnosis is confirmed by skin biopsies, the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
(VDRL) slide test, and the rapid plasma reagin (RPR) card test. Treatment with penicillin
G benzathine or penicillin G procaine is curative (42,000 IUlkg, subcutaneously, once a
week for three treatments). Tetracycline or chloramphenicol is also effective.".
An outbreak of S. aureus infection in a rabbitry was associated with a pustular,
exudative dermatitis in the young and mastitis in lactating does.P" A cellulitis due to S.
aureus infection is occasionally seen and is characterized by the acute onset of fever, and
painful edematous swelling, especially over the head, neck, and thorax." Necrosis and
slough may occur.

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is common in rabbits. T. mentagrophytes is the most common dermatophyte isolated, but M. canis, M. gypseum, M. audouinii, T. verrucosum, and T. schoenleinii have been reported." T. mentagrophytes can be isolated from the haircoat and skin
of approximately 36% of clinically normal rabbits, representing an important potential
zoonosis. The disease is most common in young animals and where husbandry and
management are suboptimal. Lesions are characterized by patchy alopecia, broken hairs,
erythema, and yellowish crusting, and typically first appear on the bridge of the nose (see
Fig. 21-20B), the eyelids, the pinnae, and the paws, and occasionally, on many body sites.
The condition is usually pruritic. Diagnosis and treatment are the same as that described
for the guinea pig. Griseofulvin is teratogenic, and should not be used in breeding does. A
modified live T. mentagrophytes vaccine may prove useful in prophylaxis.!?
Aspergillosis of the lungs and skin was reported in a whole litter of 4-week-old
rabbits.!" Multiple 1- to 2-mm papules were present all over the body. Histologically, the
papules were cystic follicles distended with necrotic debris and dichotomously branching
hyphae. Aspergillus sp. was isolated in culture. The animals were raised on moldy grass
hay bedding material. A change in nesting materials prevented further occurrences.

Viral Infections
Myxomatosis is occasionally observed in domestic rabbits. t The myxoma virus (a poxvirus)
is transmitted from reservoir wild rabbit hosts by mosquitoes. There are several strains of
virus with variable virulence. In domestic rabbits, severe disease and high mortality are
frequently produced. Affected rabbits are febrile, lethargic, and depressed. In the acute
form of the disease, there is edema and erythema of the anus, the genitalia, the lips, the
nares, and the eyelids. Less virulent strains of the virus produce numerous skin tumors
(see Fig. 21-20C). Myxomatosis appeared in the depilated skin of Angora rabbits.'?
Lesions were a few millimeters to 3 em in diameter, erythematous, and plaquelike, and
became hemorrhagic and necrotic. Morbidity was low and mortality infrequent. Diagnosis
is based on distinctive clinical signs, biopsy, and virus isolation. There is no effective
treatment, and control of insect vectors and screening of enclosures are paramount in
endemic areas. Heterologous vaccine may be useful.
Rabbit pox is infrequently reported in domestic rabbits. t The causative poxvirus is
closely related to vaccinia virus. Initial clinical signs of profuse nasal discharge, depression,
and fever are followed in 4 to 5 days by a generalized, erythematous, macular to papular
to nodular eruption. The rabbits have extensive edema of the face and perineum. Diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy and virus isolation.
Shope fibroma virus and Shope papilloma virus are oncogenic (see Neoplasia).
"See references 2, 3. 6, 8, 10, 17, 92, 96.
tSee references 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.
'See references 2, 7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 92, 96.

FIGURE 21-20. A, Crusts on the nose of a rabbit with spirochetosis. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) B, Focal area of
alopecia and crusting over the nose of a rabbit due to T. mentagrophytes infection. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) C,
Multiple erythematous nodules and plaques around the eye, on the pinna, and on the muzzle of a rabbit with
myxomatosis. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.) D, Crusting and erythema of the lateral surface of the pinna of a rabbit with
psoroptic mange. E, Crusts, scale, and focal ulcers over the dorsum of a rabbit with cheyletiellosis (area has been
clipped). F, Frostbite in a rabbit. Note acrocyanosis and necrosis of the pinna. G, Orange-colored crust and discoloration of the hair around the eye of a rat with sialodacryoadenitis virus infection. (Courtesy of J. King.) H, Trixacarus
diversus in a rat. Marked crusting and alopecia on the face and pinnae. (Courtesy of P. Bourdeau.)

1447

1448 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

Ectoparasites
Psoroptes cuniculi, a nonburrowing mite, is the most common ectoparasite of the rabbit,
and all rabbits should be considered infected until proven otherwise." Rabbits are also
susceptible to P. ovis (cattle and sheep).'? P. cuniculi is transmitted by direct contact with
infected rabbits, fomites, and contaminated environment. Starving mites survive for approximately 21 days off the host over the usual range of temperatures (5 to 30°C [41 to
86°F]) and relative humidities (20% to 75%),17 Crusts dislodged into the environment
contain many mites. The mites pierce skin to feed, and hypersensitivity to mite-related
antigens may be important in the pathogenesis of the dermatitis and pruritus.!"
P. cuniculi typically produces otitis extema (otoacariasis, ear canker, and ear mites)
(see Fig. 21-20D). Affected rabbits shake their heads and scratch at the head and ears.
Alopecia, excoriations, and secondary bacterial infection may be present around the head,
neck, and ventrum.F: 79 In early stages, a dry, whitish gray to tan crusty exudate forms
inside the vertical ear canal. Later, a dry, crusty material with a layered appearance
accumulates in the ear and the lateral surface of the pinnae. A secondary bacterial
infection may complicate the parasitic otitis extema, contributing to the foul odor and
pain. Occasionally, mites may produce lesions on the face, the head, the neck, the limbs,
the abdomen, and the back.n, 83, 97
Diagnosis is confirmed by finding the mites in ear swabs or skin scrapings (see Fig.
21-13G), In one report in which natural infections were studied and mite numbers were
quantitated, affected animals harbored 40 to 100,000 mites per rabbit. The treatment of
choice is the subcutaneous injection of ivermectin.l" 17,81,95 Do not attempt to clean out
the crusts and debris, because this causes pain and bleeding. The cage and environment
should be sanitized, and reducing the relative humidity to less than 20% while increasing
the temperature to 40°C (104°F) is of benefit in this regard.n, 18 In one report.v? an incontact guinea pig also developed psoroptic mange.
S. scabiei var. cuniculi, a burrowing mite, is a rare ectoparasite on rabbits in North
America but is commonly found in some other parts of the world, such as Africa and
India. t Typical lesions include tan to yellow, often powdery crusts, alopecia, erythema,
and excoriation on the muzzle, the lips, the bridge of the nose, the eyelids, the head, the
margins of the pinna, the paws, and the external genitalia. Pruritus is intense. Severe
infestations can lead to anorexia, lethargy, emaciation, and death. These mites can transiently produce lesions in humans. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding S. scabiei mites in
skin scrapings. However, mites are often difficult to demonstrate, and response to therapy
is a frequently used diagnostic test. The treatment of choice is iverrnectin." 17, 19,90
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, a nonburrowing mite, is a common ectoparasite on rabbits. 2 - 6, 8, 10. 16-19 Most rabbits harbor the mites without overt signs of skin disease. With
heavy infestations or in hypersensitive hosts, a variably pruritic dermatosis is seen. Lesions
consist of scaling, crusting, and variable degrees of erythema, alopecia, and greasiness over
the withers, the back (see Fig. 21-20E), and the ventral abdomen. Occasionally, lesions
are limited to the face. These mites can produce skin lesions in humans. Diagnosis is
confirmed by finding C. parasitovorax in skin scrapings or acetate tape preparations. The
treatment of choice is ivermectin.
Listrophorus (Leporacarus) gibbus is a common fur mite of rabbits, which is rarely
associated with clinical skin disease.t" 8, 10, 16-19, 86., 93. Most affected rabbits are asymptomatic. The mite is usually found attached to hair shafts, especially on the back, the groin,
and the ventral abdomen. Occasional rabbits may manifest a variably pruritic, scaly,
erythematous, alopecic dermatitis in the aforementioned sites. Some animals only manifest
pruritus and traumatic alopecia with no skin lesions. Diagnosis is confirmed by finding L.
gibbus in skin scrapings and acetate tape preparations (see Fig. 21-13H). Treatment with
pyrethrin- or pyrethroid-containing flea powders, 1% selenium sulfide baths, or 2% lime

'See references 2-6,8. 10, 11, 16-19,77,81,86,92,96.
tSee references 2-6,8, 10, 11, 16-19,74,75,90,92,96.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1449

sulfur dips is curative.I" 86a, 93a Ivermectin may also be effective.'? Fipronil spray was
reported to be effective.?' One author reported treating over 50 rabbits with fipronil spray
(3 mllkg) with no adverse effects.?? However, the therapeutic index for this product is
fairly narrow in rabbits, possibly due to the isopropyl alcohol content." Company representatives received a number of reports of suspected adverse reactions to fipronil spray in
rabbits, and recommended that the product not be used in this species."
Notoedres cati, a burrowing mite, is a rare ectoparasite on rabbits in North America,
but is commonly found in other parts of the world, such as India." Clinical signs,
diagnosis, and treatment are identical to those described for S, scabiei.
Fleas (especially C, felis felis) are occasionally found on rabbits, especially those in
households with dogs and cats. 2-6, 8, 10, 16-19, 85a In the United States, rabbits may also be
infested with Cediopsylla simplex (common Eastern rabbit flea), especially around the
head and the neck, and Odontopsyllus multispinosis (giant Eastern rabbit flea), especially
over the rump, Clinical signs, diagnosis, and therapy are the same as that described for
cats.
The rabbit sucking louse Haemodipsus ventricosus is uncommon in the United
States,2-5, 7, 9, 15-19 Pediculosis is usually associated with poor management. Lice are most
commonly found on the dorsum and may produce intense pruritus, Severe infestations in
debilitated animals may produce anemia, weakness, emaciation, and death, H. ventricosus
is a vector of tularemia, Therapy is the same as that described for cats,
Demodex cuniculi mites have been isolated from rabbits with generalized pruritus and
scaling, but their pathogenic significance is in doubt.!?
Members of the fly genus Cuterebra occasionally produce myiasis in domestic rabbits
reared outdoors or in nonscreened enclosures, t Among those fly species reported in the
United States are Cuterebra cuniculi, C, buccata, and C, horripilum. Larvae and, therefore, lesions appear in the summer and early fall. The incidence of infestation decreases
with age, which correlates with the development of immediate and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions to larval antigens, C, horripilum prefers the ventral cervical region,
whereas C. buccata larvae localize in the interscapular, axillary, inguinal, or rump area,
Initial lesions include subcutaneous cystlike structures, As the larvae (warbles) enlarge, a
"breathing hole," or fistula, is produced. The surrounding haircoat is moist and matted,
secondary bacterial infection is common, and the lesions are often painful. Treatment
consists of surgical removal of the larvae (one should not crush or otherwise damage the
larvae), routine wound care, and occasionally, administration of systemic antibiotics, Prevention and control are aimed at eliminating contact with the warble fly,
Flystrike (maggots) is most commonly seen in the perineal region, and may spread
dorsally onto the rump.!? Moist dermatitis and fur matting are present, Rabbits that are
sedentary, overweight, or that have perineal dermatitis (urine scald) may be predisposed,
Treatment includes cleansing and one injection of Ivermectin.l''

Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet rabbits, Experimental production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnormalities have been reported and are briefly presented here, Copper deficiency results in alopecia and a depigmented haircoat.v 17 Zinc deficiency produces alopecia, scaling, and a depigmented
haircoat.2, 17

Miscellaneous Conditions
Several days before parturition, the female rabbit undergoes a generalized loosening of
the fur,2, 3, 6, 8,10,17 The female rabbit pulls out mouthfuls of hair to line the nest. Hair loss

'See references 2-6, 8, 10, 16-19, 87, 88,
tSee references 2-6, 8. 10, 16-19, 92, 96,

1450 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-21. Congenital alopecia in a rabbit. (Courtesy of J.
Gourreau.)

is especially prominent on the abdomen, chest, forelegs, and hips. Some rabbits pull out
fur as a behavioral vice.v 8 Other rabbits rub fur off against the cage surface or feeders."
Does in heat and rabbits on low-fiber diets may barber their own hair.'? The barbered
rabbit typically has patches of broken-off hairs over the head and back.'? Seasonal molts
can result in haircoat irregularities and thinning."
Compulsive self-mutilating behavior was encountered in 5% to 10% of the rabbits in a
colony of Checkered crosses." Extensive auto mutilation of digits and pads of the front
feet was observed. The behavior could be interrupted by giving the rabbits haloperidol
(0.2 mglkg 1M qI2h), a dopamine antagonist. Because the condition was never seen in
animals of other breeding lines kept in the same building under identical conditions, and
the affected animals came from highly inbred stock, it was hypothesized that the disorder
was genetically determined.
Hereditary alopecias (Fig. 21-21) are rarely described in rabbits'? but are unlikely to
be seen by practitioners.
Cutaneous asthenia has been reported in rabbits (Fig. 21_22).17.76.94 The animals had
a history of skin fragility and repeated spontaneous skin tears, and were covered with
scars. The skin extensibility index (see Chap. 12) in two rabbits was 21% to 32% in the
affected rabbits as compared with a mean of 13% in normal rabbits. Light microscopic
examination was unremarkable, but electron microscopic examination revealed distorted
and tangled collagen bundles with collagen fibrils being of different diameters and having
a loose, frayed appearance.
Hutch bum is a contact dermatitis caused by urine scalding of the perineal region
because of an unclean environment or an inability of the rabbit to void urine without
soiling itself, such as after an orthopedic or neurologic injury, or with obesity." 10 Washing
the area frequently with antimicrobial agents and applying a protectant cream, such as
zinc oxide, are helpful.
Frostbite may be seen in rabbits that are suddenly exposed to cold climates without a
period of acclimatization.!" Erythema, acrocyanosis, necrosis, and sloughing are typically
seen on the pinna (see Fig. 21-20F).
Both male and female rabbits possess two sebaceous scent glands on either side of
the vulvar or testicular area that secrete a brown waxy debris." This secretion can build up
and can be easily removed by gentle traction or soap and water.
The authors have seen a condition resembling alopecia areata in rabbits. Affected
animals presented with one or more areas of noninflammatory annular alopecia, especially

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1451

FIGURE 21-22. Hyperextensibility of the skin in a rabbit with cutaneous asthenia. (Courtesy of R. Harvey.)

on the black-furred areas of the pinnae. Spontaneous recovery was accompanied by the
regrowth of white fur (Fig. 21-23).
Sebaceous adenitis was reported in domestic rabbits. 89 • 96a The animals varied from 2lf2
to 6 years of age. Lesions began around the neck or face, remained localized for several
months, then became generalized. All rabbits eventually had a generalized, nonpruritic
exfoliative dermatosis with patchy to coalescing areas of alopecia. Skin biopsies were
diagnostic. No response was seen to antibiotics, glucocorticoids, ivermectin, griseofulvin,
fatty acids, azathioprine, or oral retinoids.
Facial eczema has been reported in young suckling rabbits.'! The condition is sporadic and of unknown etiology. Areas of alopecia and slight erythema occur on the bridge
of the nose and the periocular region. Affected animals are otherwise healthy. The
condition responds rapidly to topical glucocorticoid therapy.

Neoplasia
Spontaneous nonviral cutaneous neoplasms are rare in rabbits." Papilloma, basal cell
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, sebaceous carcinoma, melanoma, osteosarcoma, and
lymphoma have been reported.
Shope papillomas are uncommon in domestic rabbits. t In the United States, the
disease occurs in the Southwest and along the Mississippi River. Shope papilloma virus (a
papovavirus) commonly infects wild rabbits, with insects serving as vectors. Lesions are
characterized by multiple hornlike growths from a Single site, especially about the eyelids
and the pinnae. Removal of the papillomas usually results in healing, and recovered
rabbits are resistant to reinfection. Spontaneous regression of lesions occurs within 12
months. Experimental infection of domestic rabbits resulted in malignant transformation
to squamous cell carcinoma within 8 to 9 months in a high percentage of the inoculation
sites. A program of screening animal enclosures and vector control should be instituted in
endemic areas.
Shope fibromas are uncommon in domestic rabbits.] Shope fibroma virus (a poxvirus)
commonly infects wild rabbits in North and South America and is transmitted via insect
vectors. Lesions consist of Single or multiple flat, firm, subcutaneous nodules, especially on
'See references 2-6,8, 10, 16-19,84,92,96.
'See references 2,3,6,8, 10, 17,92,96.
tSee references 2, 3, 6, 8, 17, 92, 96.

1452 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

FIGURE 21-23. Alopecia arcatalike condition in a rabbit. Well-circumscribed areas of noninflammatory
alopecia on the pinna are regrowing
white hair.

the genitals, the perineum, the ventral abdomen, the paw, the nose, the pinna, and the
eyelid. Newborn rabbits are more susceptible than are older animals and have more
extensive lesions. Experimentally infected adult rabbits often show spontaneous involution
of their fibromas within 5 months through necrosis and sloughing. Mosquito eradication
and enclosure screening is indicated to prevent infection in endemic areas.
Cutaneous lymphoma was reported in domestic rabbits from 7 weeks to 9 1/2 years
old. 90b Most had early internal organ involvement and systemic disease. Lesions consisted
of multifocal areas of alopecia, scale, erythema, and plaques. Histologically, the lymphomas were epitheliotropic and CD3+. One rabbit was unsuccessfully treated with oral
isotretinoin and interferon-a.

• RAT
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial skin infections are uncommon in pet rats, are usually caused by S. aureus, and
are secondary to trauma (cage-related injuries and bite wounds) or self-inflicted (the
pruritus associated with ectoparasitesl.P" 10, 16-19 Rats are more resistant to experimental
wound infection with S. aureus than are mice or hamsters.!? Infections resulting from
cage-related injury are typically seen on the nose and the muzzle, whereas those associated with bite wounds typically occur around the head, the tail, the rump, and the
perineal area. Staphylococcal dermatitis may be superficial (alopecia, erythema, oozing,
and crust) or deep (abscess, fistula, necrosis, and ulcer) and is usually nonpruritic. Granulomas occurred on the trunk and mammary gland in association with infection by an
atypical slow-growing S. aureus .100 Other bacteria occasionally isolated from cutaneous
abscesses and pyogranulomas in rats include Streptococcus sp., P. pneumotropica, Klebsiella pneumoniae, P, aeruginosa, and Mycobacterium lepraemurium (rat leprosy).2,8, 16-19
Treatment of bacterial dermatitis includes some combination of elimination of predisposing causes, surgical drainage, daily topical cleaning with 3% hydrogen peroxide or 0.5%
to 1% chlorhexidine, and systemic antibiotic administration (see Table 21-1).
S. moniliformis is a rare cause of epizootics of edema and cyanosis of the extremities.2, 8, 17
C. kutscheri (murium) is a rare cause of epizootics of furunculosis and cutaneous
pyogranulomas, which may progress to necrosis and sloughing of extremities.v 8

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1453

Fungal Infections
Dermatophytosis is rare in rats and is usually associated with T. mentagrophytes. 1- 6 , 8, 10, 16-19
This dermatophyte can be isolated from the haircoat of clinically normal rats and is a
potential zoonotic agent. Lesions are most commonly seen on the neck, the back, and the
base of the tail and consist of annular areas of alopecia, broken hairs, scales, and variable
degrees of erythema and crusting. Pruritus is usually minimal to absent, Diagnosis and
treatment are as described for guinea pigs.

Viral Infections
Sialodacryoadenitis virus (a coronavirus) infection causes eye rubbing and scratching,
periorbital swelling, and red tears (chromodacryorrhea) (see Fig. 21-20G).2, 4,17
Poxvirus infection has been described in laboratory white rats.!? Skin lesions consisted
of erythematous papules, which became crusted and occurred mainly on the glabrous
areas of the body (tail, paws, and muzzle). Sometimes, the affected portions of paws and
tail underwent necrosis and sloughing. Diagnosis was confirmed by biopsy, electron microscopy, and viral isolation.

Ectoparasites
N. muris occasionally causes a severely pruritic dermatitis in rats. 2 - 6 , 8, 10, 16-19 Lesions are
most commonly present on the pinnae, the nose, the paws, and the ventrum and consist
of erythema, papules, yellowish hyperkeratotic crusts, and excoriations, Diagnosis is confirmed by skin scrapings. Treatment is accomplished with topical 2% lime sulfur dips
(once weekly until 2 weeks after cure) or subcutaneous injections of ivermectin.
Other mites that are rarely found on rats include Radfordia ensifera, 0. bacoti
(tropical rat mite), S. scabiei, Trixacarus diversus (Fig. 21-20H), T. caviae, M. musculi,
and Demodex sp."
Fleas (especially C. felis felis) may be recovered from pet rats maintained in households frequented by cats and dogs. 2 - 6 , 8,17
The sucking louse Polyplax spinulosa is occasionally found on pet rats. t Some animals
may be asymptomatic carriers, and other animals manifest varying degrees of dermatitis
and pruritus. Young animals, debilitated animals, and animals in poor management situations are more likely to be affected. Lice and related dermatoses are most commonly
found on the neck and back. Treatment can be accomplished with topical insecticides or
ivermectin injections.

Nutritional Disorders
Nutritional deficiencies are unlikely to be encountered in pet rats. Experimental production of nutritional deficiencies with resultant cutaneous abnormalities has been reported,
and these are briefly mentioned here. Zinc deficiency produces exfoliative dermatitis,
alopecia, and depigmentation of the hairco at, 2, 17 Pantothenic acid deficiency results in
exfoliative dermatitis, depigmentation of the haircoat, and excessive harderian gland activity with increased porphyrin secretion resulting in red tears and blood-caked whiskers.v 17
Riboflavin deficiency produces alopecia, scaling, and dermatitis, especially on the extremities." Pyridoxine deficiency results in exfoliative dermatitis, especially on the face, the ears,
the limbs, and the tail.2' 17 Biotin deficiency causes exfoliative dermatitis and periocular
alopecia." 17 Niacin deficiency causes alopecia and excessive harderian gland activity,
increased porphyrin secretion, and blood-caked whiskers.v 17 Essential fatty acid deficiency

"See references 2, 3. 6, 8, 10, 16-19, 99, 101.
'See references 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 16-19.

1454 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets

produces an exfoliative dermatitis and, occasionally, necrosis of the tail. 2, 17 Protein deficiency causes alopecia, exfoliative dermatitis, and depigmentation of the haircoat." 17

Miscellaneous Conditions
Barbering and bite wounds are frequently seen when rats are housed together. 2 - 6 , 8, 17
These behaviors can be exacerbated by crowding, stress, and boredom. Areas most commonly affected include the muzzle, the whiskers, the face, the head, the rump, the tail,
and the perineum. Rats may also rub the hair off the muzzle as they stick their face
through slotted feeders or wire bars.!?
Rats have numerous types of hereditary hairlessness that are probably never seen by
the practitioner (Fig. 21-24).17
Ringtail is a poorly understood condition seen in rats. 2 - 8 , 17 The incidence of the
disorder increases as the relative humidity falls below 40% and is especially common in
young unweaned animals housed in cages with wire mesh bottoms, on hygroscopic bedding, and in rooms with excessive ventilation. In the northern hemisphere, most cases are
seen from November to May, when heating systems often cause marked reductions in
relative humidity. Some strains of rats seem more susceptible than others. The condition
usually occurs after 2 months of reduced relative humidity. One or more annular constrictions develop in the tail, which becomes edematous, inflamed, and necrosed distal to the
constrictions (Fig. 21-25). Ringtail is prevented by maintaining a relative humidity of at
least 50%.
Perianal pruritus is seen in association with pinworms (Syphacia muris).2, 4, 8, 17 Infected rats occasionally mutilate the base of the tail. Diagnosis is confirmed by microscopic examination of strips of cellophane (Scotch) tape that have been applied to the
perineum. The eggs of S, muris are banana shaped and about 30 p.,m by 150 us«.
Ivermectin is effective treatment.
Auricular chondritis has been described in rats.!" The condition has occurred spontaneously and in association with the placement of metal ear tags or immunization with type
II collagen. Typically, both ears are affected, although one ear may be affected days to
weeks before the other. The pinnae are swollen, erythematous, and nodular, and they
become thickened and deformed. Pain and pruritus are rare. Histologically, there is a
multifocal granulomatous chondritis with progressive destruction of cartilage.
Systemic hair embolism has been reported subsequent to intravenous injections in
rats.!? Cutaneous lesions consist of focal areas of necrosis and ulceration on the ventral

FIGURE 21-24. Congenital alopecia in a litter of rats, (Courtesy of
J. King,)

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1455

FIGURE 21-25. Ringtail in a rat.
Necrosis of the distal portion of the
tail. (Courtesy of G. Kollias.)

aspect of the body. Histologic examination reveals granulomatous and necrotizing dermatitis and panniculitis, and intravascular hair shaft fragments.
The fur of the aged rat frequently turns yellow and becomes more coarse.f The cause
is unknown.
Alopecia areata was reported in DEBR rats and proposed as a useful model of the
human disease."?
Brownish scales were observed to occur on the skin of rats, mainly on the dorsum
and tail and were more numerous in males and with increasing age. 102 The scales also
occurred in strain-dependent patterns. Gonadectomy produced a fading of the scales in
males, whereas the administration of androgen to gonadectomized males and to females
produced a darkening of the scales.

Neoplasia
Spontaneous cutaneous neoplasms are uncommon in rats. 2 - 6 . 8. 17. 98 Mesenchymal neoplasms are more common than are epithelial neoplasms. The most common are fibromas,
fibrosarcomas, and lipomas. The face, the shoulder, the flank, the tail, and the paws are
typically affected. Other reported skin neoplasms in rats include papilloma, keratoacanthoma, sebaceous gland tumors, squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, hair
follicle tumors, hemangiosarcoma, melanoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytoma.

• REFERENCES
1. Balsari A, et al: Dermatophytes in clinically healthy
laboratory animals. Lab Anim 15:75, 1981.
2. Benirschke K, et al: Pathology of Laboratory Animals.
Springer Verlag, New York, 1978.
3. Burgmann P: Dermatology of rabbits, rodents, and
ferrets. In: Nesbitt GH, Ackerman LJ (eds): Dermatology for the Small Animal Practitioner. Veterinary
Learning Systems Co., Trenton, NJ, 1991, P 205.
4. Burke TJ: Skin disorders of rodents, rabbits, and ferrets. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy Xl. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia,
1992, p 1170.
5. Clyde VL: Practical treatment and control of common
ectoparasites in exotic pets. Vet Med 91:632, 1996.

6. Collins BR: Dermatologic disorders of common small
nondomestic animals. In: Nesbitt GH (ed): Dermatology. Churchill Livingstone, New York, 1987, p. 235.
7. Cotchin E, Row FJC: Pathology of Laboratory Rats
and Mice. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford,
1967.
7a. Gobel T: Bacterial diseases and antimicrobial therapy in small mammals. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
(Suppl)21:5, 1999.
8. Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The Biology and Medicine
of Rabbits and Rodents Ill. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 1989.
9. Harkness JE: Small rodents. Vet Clin North Am
(Small Anim Pract) 24:89, 1994.

1456 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
10. Hillyer EV, Quesenberry KE: Ferrets, Rabbits, and
Rodents. Clinical Medicine and Surgery. W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1997.
11. Hime JM, O'Donoghue PN: Handbook of Diseases of
Laboratory Animals. Heinemann Veterinary Books,
London, 1979.
12. Jacobson ER, Kollias GV: Exotic Animals. Churchill
Livingstone, New York, 1988.
13. Lopez-Martinez R, et al: Dermatophytes isolated
from laboratory animals. Mycopathologia 88:111, 1984.
14. Morris TH: Antibiotic therapeutics in laboratory animals. Lab Anim 9:16, 1995.
15. Rosenthal KL: Bacterial infections and antibiotic therapy in small mammals. Compend Contin Educ Pract
Vet 20 (Suppl):13, 1998.
16. Schuchman SM: Individual care and treatment of
rabbits, mice, rats, guinea pigs, hamsters, and gerbils.
In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X.
W.B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1989, p 738.
17. Scott DW, et al: Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology V. W. B. Saunders Co, Philadelphia, 1995,
p 1127.
18. Stein S, Walshaw S: Handbook of Rabbit and Rodent
Medicine. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1996.
19. Timm Kl: Pruritus in rabbits, rodents, and ferrets.
Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 18:1077,
1988.
20. Wagner JE, Farrar PL: Husbandry and medicine of
small rodents. Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract)
17:1061, 1987.

Chinchilla
21. Hoefer HL: Chinchillas. Vet Clin North Am (Small
Anim Pract) 24:103, 1994.
22. Rees RG: Some conditions of the skin and fur of
Chinchilla lanigera. J Small Anim Pract 4:213, 1963.

Ferret
23. Ackerman J: Ultrasonographic detection of adrenal
gland tumors in two ferrets. J Am Vet Med Assoc
205:1001, 1994.
24. Besch-Williford CL: Biology and medicine of the ferret. Vet Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 17:1155,
1987.
25. Cooper JE: Skin diseases of ferrets. Vet Ann 30:325,
1990.
26. Dinsdale JR, Rest JR: Yeast infection in ferrets. Vet
Rec 137:647, 1995.
27. Duval-Hudelson KA: Coccidioidomycosis in three European ferrets. J Zoo Wildlife Med 21:353, 1990.
28. Fox JG: Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Williams
& Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1998.
29. Gould WI. et al: Evaluation of urinary cortisol: Creatinine ratios for the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism
associated with adrenal gland tumors in ferrets. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 206:42, 1995.
30. King WW, et al. Superficial spreading pyoderma and
ulcerative dermatitis in a ferret. Vet Dermatol 7:43,
1996.
31. Lewington J: Frontline for ferret fleas. University
Sydney Postgraduate Foundation Veterinary Science
Control Therapy Series 189:856, 1996.
32. Li X, et al: Cutaneous lymphoma in a ferret (Mustela
putorius furo). Vet Pathol 32:55, 1995.
33. Li X, et al: Neoplastic diseases in ferrets: 574 cases
1968-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1402, 1998.
34. Noli C, et al: Demodicosis in ferrets (Mustela putonus fum). Vet Quart 18:28, 1996.

35. Paradis M: Guide du furet domestique. Med Vet
Quebec 17:63, 1987.
35a. Patterson MM, Kirchain SM: Comparison of three
treatments for control of ear mites in ferrets. Lab
Anim Sci 49:655, 1999.
36. Rosenbaum MR, et al: Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma in a ferret. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1441,
1996.
37. Rosenthal KL, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism associated
with adrenocortical tumor or nodular hyperplasia of
the adrenal gland in ferrets: 50 cases (1987-1991). J
Am Vet Med Assoc 203:271, 1993.
38. Rosenthal KL: Ferrets. Vet Clin North Am (Small
Anim Pract) 24:1, 1994.
39. Rosenthal JL, Peterson ME: Evaluation of plasma androgen and estrogen concentrations in ferrets with
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1097,
1996.
39a. Rosenthal KL: Adrenal gland diseases in ferrets. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:401, 1997.
40. Rudmann DG, et al: Complex ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma in a brown-footed ferret (Mustela putonus [uro). Lab Anim Sci 44:637, 1994.
41. Scott DW, et al: Bilaterally symmetric alopecia associated with an adrenocortical adenoma in a pet ferret.
Vet Dermatol 2:165, 1991.
42. Scott DW, et al: Figurate erythema resembling erythema annulare centrifugum in a ferret with adrenocortical adenocarcinoma-associated alopecia. Vet
Dermatol 5:111, 1994.
42a. Shoemaker NJ, et al: Correlation between age at
neutering and age at onset of hyperadrenocorticism in
ferrets. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:195, 2000.
43. Weiss CA, Scott MV: Clinical aspects and surgical
treatment of hyperadrenocorticism in the domestic
ferret: 94 cases (1994-1996). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
33:487, 1997.
43a. Weiss CA, et al: Surgical treatment and long-term
outcome of ferrets with bilateral adrenal tumors or
adrenal hyperplasia: 56 cases (1994-1997). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 215:820, 1999.

Gerbil
44. Jacklin MR: Dermatosis associated with Acarus farris
in gerbils. J Small Anim Pract 38:410, 1997.
45. Jackson TA, et al: Squamous cell carcinoma of the
midventral abdominal pad in three gerbils. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 209:789, 1996.

Guinea Pig
46. Bobrowski PJ, et al: Latent herpes simplex virus reactivation in the guinea pig. An animal model for recurrent disease. Int J Dermatol 30:29, 1991.
47. Fry FL: Apparent spontaneous ergot-induced necrotiting dermatitis in a guinea pig. J Small Exotic Anim
Med 2:165, 1994.
47a. Cuaguere E: Acariose a Chirodiscoides caviae et
dermatophytie a Microsporum canis chez un cobaye.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34:65, 1999.
48. Hirsjarvi P, Phyala L: Ivermectin treatment of a colony of guinea pigs infested with fur mite (Chirodiscoides caviae). Lab Anim 29: 200, 1995.
49. Peguin J: Phthiriose a Trimenopon chez un cobaye.
Point Vet 28:91, 1997.
50. Quesenberry KE: Guinea pigs. Vet Clin North Am
(Small Anim Pract) 24:67, 1994.
51. Rothwell TL, et al: Haematological and pathological
responses to experimental Trixacarus caviae infection
in guinea pigs. J Comp Pathol 104: 179, 1991.

Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets • 1457
51a. Shipstone M: Trixacarus caviae infestation in a
guinea pig: Failure to respond to ivermectin administration. Aust Vet Pract 27:143, 1997.
52. Sohnle PD, et al: Mechanisms involved in elimination
of organisms from experimental cutaneous Candida
albicans infections in guinea pigs. J Immunol 117:525,
1976.
53. Van Cutsem J, et al: The in vitro antifungal activity of
ketoconazole, zinc pyrithione, and selenium sulfide
against Pityrosporum and their efficacy as a shampoo
in the treatment of experimental pityrosporosis in
guinea pigs. J Am Acad. Dermatol 22:993, 1990.
53a. Vangeel I, et al: Prevalence of dermatophytes in
asymptomatic guinea pigs and rabbits. Vet Rec 146:
440,2000.

69. Sundberg JP, Schultz LD: Inherited mouse mutations: Models for the study of alopecia. J Invest Dermatol 96:95S, 1991.
70. Sundberg JP, et al: Alopecia areata in humans and
other mammalian species. J Invest Dermatol 104:32s,
1995.
71. Vachon P, Aubry L: L'utilisation d'ivermectin pour Ie
traitement des acariens, Myobia musculi et Myocoptes
musculinus, dans une colonie de souris transgeniques.
Can Vet J 37:231, 1996.
72. Wardrip CL, et al: Diagnostic exercise: head and
neck swelling in AlJCr mice. Lab Anim Sci 44:280,
1994.
73. Wrench R: Scale prophylaxis. A new antiparakeratotic
assay. Arch Dermatol 117:213, 1981.

Hamster

Rabbit

54. Bauck LB, et al: Hyperadrenocorticism in three teddy
bear hamsters. Can Vet J 25:247, 1984.
55. Harvey RG, et al: Epidermotropic cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) in Syrian hamsters
(Mesocricetus auratusi. A report of six cases and the
demonstration of T-cell specificity. Vet Dermatol 3:
13, 1992.
56. Kajdacsy-Balla A, et al: Syphilis in the Syrian hamster.
A model of human venereal and congenital syphilis.
Am J Pathol 126:599, 1987.

74. Arlian LG, et al: Sarcoptes scabiei: The circulating
antibody response and induced immunity to scabies.
Exp Parasitol 78:37, 1994.
75. Arlian LG, et al: Sarcoptes scabiei: Histopathological
changes associated with acquisition and expression of
host immunity to scabies. Exp Parasitol 78:51, 1994.
76. Brown PJ, et al: Abnormalities of collagen fibrils in a
rabbit with connective tissue defect similar to EhlersDanlos syndrome. Res Vet Sci 55:346, 1993.
77. Carpenter JW, et al: Caring for rabbits: An overview
and formulary. Vet Med 90:340, 1995.
78. Cooper PE, Penaoliggon J: Use of Frontline spray on
rabbits. Vet Rec 140:535, 1997.
79. Cutler SL: Ectopic Psoroptes cuniculi infestation in a
pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 39:86, 1998.
80. Harkness JE: Rabbit husbandry and medicine. Vet
Clin North Am (Small Anim Pract) 17:1019, 1987.
81. Harrenstien L, et al: How to handle respiratory, ophthalmic, neurological and dermatologic problems in
rabbits. Vet Med 90:373, 1995.
82. Hazarika RA, et al: Experimental staphylococcal dermatitis in rabbits. Indian J Vet Pathol 15:39, 1991.
83. Hillyer EV: Pet rabbits. Vet Clin North Am (Small
Anim Pract) 24:25, 1994.
84. Hotchkiss CE, et al: Malignant melanoma in two rabbits. Lab Anim Sci 44:377, 1994.
85. Iglauer F, et al: Hereditary compulsive self-mutilating
behavior in laboratory rabbits. Lab Anim 29:385,
1995.
86. Jenkins JR: Skin disorders of the rabbit. J SmaIl Exotic Anim Med 1:64, 1991.
86a. Kirwan AP, et al: Diagnosis and prevalence of Leporacarus gibbus in the fur of domestic rabbits in the
UK. Vet Rec 142:20, 1998.
87. Kumar SP, et al: Use of levamisole for the treatment
of mange due to Notoedres cati in rabbits. Indian Vet
J 70:161, 1993.
88. Kamboj DS, et aI: Clinicotherapeutic efficacy of amitraz against Notoedres cati infestation in rabbits. Indian Vet J 70:751, 1993.
89. Linder KE, et al: Generalized exfoliative dermatosis
with sebaceous adenitis in three domestic rabbits.
Proc Annu Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Am CoIl
Vet Dermatol 14:89, 1998.
90. Maiti SK, et al: An evaluation of ivermectin oral
preparation in the treatment of sarcoptic mange in
rabbits. Indian Vet J 72:612, 1995.
91. Malley D: Use of Frontline spray in rabbits. Vet Rec
140:664, 1997.
92. Manning PJ, et al: The Biology of the Laboratory
Rabbit II. Academic Press, San Diego, 1994.

Mouse
57. Abbott DP, et al: A condition resembling pagetoid
reticulosis in a laboratory mouse. Lab Anim 25:153,
1991.
58. Andrews AG, et al: Immune complex vasculitis with
secondary ulcerative dermatitis in aged C57BU6NNla
mice. Vet Pathol 31:293, 1994.
59. Baumans V, et al: The effectiveness of Ivomec and
Neguvon in the control of murine mites. Lab Anim
22:243, 1988.
60. Baumans V, et al: The use of repeated treatment with
Ivomec and Neguvon in the control of murine mites
and oxurid worms. Lab Anim 22: 246, 1988.
61. Booth CJ, Sundberg JP: Hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas in inbred laboratory mice. Lab Anim Sci
45:497, 1995.
62. Foster HL, et al: The Mouse in Biomedical Research.
Academic Press, New York, 1982.
63. Kietzmann M, et al: The mouse epidermis as a model
in skin pharmacology: Influence of age and sex on
epidermal metabolic reactions and their circadian
rhythms. Lab Anim 24:321, 1990.
64. Locklear J, et al: Spontaneous vulvar carcinomas in
1291J mice. Lab Anim Sci 45:604, 1995.
64a. Mahler M, Jelfnek F: Granulomatous inflammation
in the tails of mice associated with Mycobacterium
chelonae infection. Lab Anim 34:212, 2000.
65. Neubauer H, et al: Specific detection of mousepox
virus by polymerase chain reaction. Lab Anim 31:201,
1997.
66. Niemaltowski MG, et al: The inflammatory and immune response to mousepox (infectious ectomelia) virus. Acta Virol 38: 299, 1994.
67. Papini R, Marcancini A: Treatment with ivermectin in
drinking water against Myobias musculi and Myocoptes musculinis mange in naturally infected laboratory
mice. Agnew Parasitol 32:11, 1991.
68. Sundberg JP, et al: Inherited mouse mutations as
models of human adnexal, cornification, and papulosquamous dermatoses. J Invest Dermatol 95:62S,
1990.

1458 • Dermatoses of Pet Rodents, Rabbits, and Ferrets
93. Okerman L, et al: Cutaneous staphylococcosis in rabbits. Vet Rec 114:313, 1984.
93a. Pinter L: Leporacarus gibbus and Spilopsyllus cuniculi infestation in a pet rabbit. J Small Anim Pract 40:
220, 1999.
94. Sinke JD, et aI: A case of Ehlers-Danlos-like syndrome in a rabbit with review of the disease in other
species. Vet Quart 19:182, 1997.
95. Tripathi SC, et al: Therapeutic efficacy of ivermectin
in rabbits (Orydolagus cuniculus) experimentally infected with Psoroptes cuniculi. Indian J Anim Hlth
32:55, 1993.
96. Weisbroth SH, et aI: The Biology of the Laboratory
Rabbit. Academic Press, New York, 1974.
96a. White SD, et aI: Sebaceous adenitis in four domestic
rabbits (Orydalagus cuniculus). Vet Dermatol 11:53,
2000.
96b. White SD, et aI: Lymphoma with cutaneous involvement in three domestic rabbits (Onjdolagus cuniculus). Vet Dermatol 1l:61, 2000.

97. Yeatts JWG: Rabbit mite infestation. Vet Rec 134:
359, 1994.

Rat
98. Binhazim AA, et al: Spontaneous hemangiosarcoma in
the tail of a Long-Evans rat carrying the Elcer mutation. Lab Anim Sci 44:191, 1994.
99. Erdelyi LL et al: Behandlung med ivermectin mot
springmask och piilskvalster hos laboratorieratta: Strategisk program i en produktion-sanhet. Scand J Lab
Anim Sci 15:184, 1988.
100. Kunstyr I, et aI: Granulomatous dermatitis and mastitis in two SPF rats associated with a slowly growing
Staphylococcus aureus-a case report. Lab Anim 29:
177, 1995.
101. MacHole EJA: Mange in domesticated rats. Vet Rec
138:312, 1996.
102. Tayama K, Shisa H: Development of pigmented
scales on rat skin: Relation to age, sex, strain, and
hormonal effect. Lab Anim Sci 44:240, 1994.

C!taJJ(l'r

22
Chronology of Veterinary
Dermatology (1900-2000)

A

n overview of the history of veterinary dermatology, Historical J:Iighlights-Ancient
and Modem, can be found in Chapter 90, pages 711 to 735, of the second edition
of this book (1976). This material was updated for the third edition of this book (1983).
Because the historical material is unchanged, it is not repeated in the sixth edition.
Instead, the chronology is given here and updated to 2000.
1900
1903
1908
1910

1926
1930
1931
1931
1948

1953
1958
1958
1959
1959
1959
1962

Joseph Bayer and Eugene Frohner of Vienna, Austria, persuaded Hugo Schindelka
to write a book on skin diseases of domestic animals.
Publication of the first book on veterinary dermatology, Hautkrankheiten bei
Haustieren (Skin Diseases of Domestic Animals), by Hugo Schindelka at Vienna.
Publication of the second and final edition of Schindelka's book, Hautkrankheiten
bei Haustieren.
Publication of the first book on comparative dermatology, Die Vergleichende
Pathologie der Haut (The Comparative Pathology of the Skin), by Julius Heller at
Berlin, Germany.
Publication of Animal Dermatology by Leblois in France.
Publication of the book, Course in Skin Diseases of Domestic Animals, by N.N.
Bogdanovat Moscow.
Publication of Die Klinik der Wichtigsten Tierdermatosen (The Clinic of the Most
Important Animal Dermatoses) by Julius Heller at Berlin, Germany.
Publication of Veterinari Dermatologie by Frantisek Kral (Frank Kral) at Bmo,
Czechoslovakia.
Frank Kral emigrated to the United States and joined the faculty of the School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. He formed the
Veterinary Dermatology Clinic, which was the first teaching unit of animal skin
diseases in the United States.
Publication of Veterinary Dermatology by Frank Kral and Benjamin J. Novak, first
veterinary dermatologic book in English: a complete revision, expansion, and translation of Kral's 1931 book (325 pages).
Formation of the Dermatology Subcommittee of the Committee on General Medicine of the American Animal Hospital Association on April 23, 1958. R.W, Worley
and G.H. Muller, Cochairmen; first organization of veterinary dermatology.
E.M. Farber appoints C.H. Muller to the clinical faculty of Stanford University's
Dermatology Department and establishes the first center of comparative dermatology in America.
R.M. Schwartzman obtains the first Ph.D. degree in Veterinary Dermatology and
shortly thereafter joins F. Kral's veterinary dermatology section at the University of
Pennsylvania.
Formation of the Dermatology Committee of the American Animal Hospital Association on February 5, 1959. C.H. Muller, Chairman. Committee functioned for 7
years.
Publication of the Compendium of Veterinary Dermatology by Frank Kral. Handout for Kral's cross-country symposia in 1959 (69 pages),
Publication of A Comparative Study of Skin Diseases of Dog and Man by Robert
1459

1460 • Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000)

1963
1964
1964
1964
1964
1964
1964
1965
1965
1966
1966
1967
1967
1968
1968
1969

1970
1973
1974
1974
1974
1974
1974
1976

M. Schwartzman and Milton Orkin: the first book in English on comparative
dermatology (365 pages).
Transatlantic Conference on Canine and Feline Dermatology at Chicago and London on April 26, 1963. Knowles, Muller, and Schwartzman for the United States;
Singleton, Joshua, and Wilkinson for England.
Publication of section on Dermatologic Diseases (edited by C.H. Muller) in R.W.
Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy. Revised and updated in all subsequent editions.
Publication of chapter on "Feline diseases of the skin" by J.D. Conroy in Feline
Medicine.
The American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology was organized at Philadelphia
by Conroy, Kral (President), Muller, and Schwartzman.
Symposium on Comparative Physiology and Pathology of the Skin at London,
England, in April, 1964. A.J. Rook and C.S. Walton, Chairmen. Proceedings were
published in 1965.
Publication of Veterinary and Comparative Dermatology by F. Kral and R.M.
Schwartzman: a revision and expansion of Kral and Novak's Veterinary Dermatology (444 pages).
First Symposium on Comparative Dermatology sponsored by the American Academy of Dermatology at Chicago on December 8, 1964. Milton Orkin was chairman of this and the next three symposia.
Second Symposium on Comparative Dermatology, December 7, 1965, at Chicago.
Publication of Comparative Physiology and Pathology of the Skin by A.J. Rook and
C.S. Walton.
Third Symposium on Comparative Dermatology, December 5, 1966, at Miami,
Florida.
Symposium on Skin Diseases Common to Man and Animals at Palm Springs,
California, on November 2, 1966. Orkin and Muller, Cochairmen.
Fourth Symposium on Comparative Dermatology, December 4, 1967, at Chicago.
Publication of Atlas of Canine and Feline Dermatoses by R.M. Schwartzman and
Frank Kral.
Publication of the atlas, Canine Skin Lesions, by C.H. Muller.
J.D. Conroy receives a Ph.D. degree and thereby launches the first career devoted
exclusively to veterinary dermatohistopathology in America.
Publication of Small Animal Dermatology by C.R. Muller and R.W. Kirk (485
pages): the first complete textbook devoted exclusively to skin diseases of dogs and
cats. Used as a textbook by many schools of veterinary medicine. Translated into
Japanese and French and reprinted in Taiwan.
Formation of an organizing committee of the American College of Veterinary
Dermatologists consisting of Blakemore, Conroy, Muller (Chairman), Schwartzman, Kirk, and Kral.
The formation of the Task Force on Comparative Dermatology as part of the
National Program for Dermatology of the American Academy of Dermatology.
Publication of the atlas, Feline Skin Lesions, by C.H. Muller.
Publication of a stereoscopic atlas of Clinical Dermatology of Small Animals by
C.C. Doering and H.E. Jensen (211 pages).
Dermatology Specialty Croup of the American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine (ACVIM) receives approval of the Advisory Board of Veterinary Specialties of the American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) on April 5, 1974.
The first meeting of the Dermatology Specialty Croup of the ACVIM was held on
April 20, 1974, at San Francisco.
The Dermatology Specialty Croup was officially recognized by receiving probationary approval of the ACVIM and Council of Education of the AVMA on July 20,
1974, at Denver, Colorado.
Formation of the British Veterinary Dermatology Study Croup on February 20,

Chronology of Veterinary Dennatology (1900-2000) • 1461

1976
1976
1979
1980
1980
1981
1981
1981
1981
1982

1982

1982

1983
1983
1983
1984

1984

1984
1984
1984
1984
1985

1976. Honorary Secretary Brian G. Bagnal; committee members Michael R
Geary, Raymond Hopes, David H. Lloyd, and Keith L. Thoday.
Publication of the Veterinary Dermatology Newsletter (Vol. 1, No.1) in May 1976
by the British Veterinary Dermatology Study Group.
Publication of the second edition of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H. Muller
and RW. Kirk (809 pages). Translated into Italian.
Publication of The Skin and Internal Disease (edited by G.H. Muller), the Veterinary Clinics of North America, 1979, W.B. Saunders Company (152 pages).
Publication of Feline Dermatology 1900-1978: A Monograph by D.W. Scott (128
pages).
Frank Kral deceased September 7, 1980.
Formation of a French veterinary dermatologic organization: Groupe D'Etude en
Dennatologie des Animaux de Compagnie (GEDAC). President Pierre Fourrier,
Secretary Didier Carlotti.
Publication of Canine Dermatoses by J.M. Keep (Australia).
Publication of Feline Dermatoses by J.M. Keep (Australia).
Publication of Equine Dermatoses by RR Pascoe (Australia).
On March 9, 1982, the American Board of Veterinary Specialties of the AVMA
granted probationary approval to the American College of Veterinary Dermatology
as a certifying body in Veterinary Dermatology. This group replaces the Dermatology Specialty Group of the ACVIM. The organizing committee of the American
College of Veterinary Dermatology consists of Doctors J.C. Blakemore, J.D. Conroy, RE.W. Halliwell, G.H. Muller, and E. Small.
The American College of Veterinary Dermatology was approved by the Council of
Education of the AVMA on April 23, 1982, and approved by the House of
Delegates of the AVMA on July 20, 1982. The charter members of the group are
the diplomates of the ACVIM (Dermatology) listed under 1981. There were 24
diplomates at the end of 1982.
Formation of a German veterinary dermatology organization called the "Freundeskreis Hautkrankheiten Interessierter Tierartzte." The organizing members are H.
Koch (President), B. Beardi, G. Feslev, H. Gehrig, G. Kasa, F. Kasa, G.H. Muller,
and C. Terling. The first meeting was held on October 12, 1982, at Birkenfeld,
West Germany. The name of this organization was later changed to Arbeitskreis
Veterinar Dermatologie.
Publication of the third edition of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H. Muller,
RW. Kirk, and D.W. Scott (889 pages). Translated into Portuguese and Japanese.
Publication of Canine and Feline Dermatology: A Systematic Approach by G.H.
Nesbitt (244 pages).
Publication of Atlas of Skin Diseases of the Horse by L.F. Montes and J.T.
Vaughan.
Formation of the European Society of Veterinary Dermatology (ESVD) on September 18, 1984. President Hans Koch (Germany), Vice President Ton Willemse
(Holland), Secretary David Lloyd (England), Treasurer Didier Carlotti (France),
Membership Secretary Pierre Fourrier (France), Meeting Secretary Claudia Von
Tscharner (Switzerland). Honorary Members Richard Halliwell, Peter Ihrke,
Robert Kirk, George Muller, and Danny Scott (USA).
Formation of an Australian veterinary dermatology organization began; started
informally that year under the auspices of the Australian College of Veterinary
Scientists. It granted full fellowship by examination in veterinary dermatology to
Kenneth V. Mason on August 28, 1984.
Publication of Equine Dermatoses by RR Pascoe (Australia).
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Pig by RD.A. Cameron (Australia).
Formation of Groupe de Travail en Dermatologie Veterinaire in Belgium.
Formation of Swedish Veterinary Dermatology Study Group in Sweden.
Formation of Dansk Selskab for Veterinaer Dermatologi in Denmark.

1462 • Chronology of Veterinary Dennatology (1900-2000)

1985
1986
1986
1987
1987
1987
1987
1988
1988
1988
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1989
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1990
1991
1991
1991
1991
1991
1992
1992

Publication of the Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology by GT. Wilkinson
(272 pages), Australia.
Publication of Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat by DJ. Grant (187 pages),
England.
Formation of the Canadian Academy of Veterinary Dermatology. President Lowell
Ackerman, Secretary B.P. Pukay.
Publication of Contemporary Issues in Small Animal Practice: Dermatology, Vol. 8,
New York (332 pages) (edited by G.H. Nesbitt).
Formation, on October 23, of the Italian Veterinary Dermatology Group as part of
the Italian Small Animal Veterinary Association (SCIVAC). President, Alessandra
Fondati.
Formation of the Grupo de Dermatologia de Asosiaci6n de Veterinarios Especialistas en Pequefios Animales in Spain.
Publication of Atlas of Skin Diseases in Dogs and Cats by F. Kristensen (Denmark).
Publication of Large Animal Dermatology by D.W. Scott (487 pages).
Publication of Vanliga Hudsjukdomar Hos Hund Och Katt by B. Ohlen (Sweden).
Publication of Pruritus (edited by S.D. White), the Veterinary Clinics of North
America, 1988, W.B. Saunders Company (143 pages).
Publication of the fourth edition of Small Animal Dermatology by G.H. Muller,
RW. Kirk, and D.W. Scott (1007 pages). Translated into German.
Publication of first issue of Veterinary Dermatology, an international journal devoted to dermatology.
Publication of Skin Infection in Domestic Animals by A. Chatterjee (India).
Publication of Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats by L.M. Reedy and W.H.
Miller, Jr.
Publication of Skin Diseases of Cattle by DJ. Bryden (Australia).
Publication of Practical Canine Dermatology by L.J. Ackerman.
Publication of Practical Feline Dermatology by L.J. Ackerman.
Publication of Practical Equine Dermatology by L.J. Ackerman.
The First World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in September at
Dijon, France.
Publication of Small Animal Allergy. A Practical Guide by E. Baker.
Publication of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology by B.A. Kummel.
Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. I, by C. von Tscharner
and RE.W. Halliwell.
Publication of Common Skin Diseases in Dogs and Cats by B. Ohlen (Sweden).
Publication of A Colour Atlas of Equine Dermatology by RR Pascoe (Australia).
Publication of Canine and Feline Dermatology by K.P. Baker and L.R Thomsett
(United Kingdom).
Publication of Advances in Clinical Dermatology (edited by DJ DeBoer), the
Veterinary Clinics of North America, 1990, W.B. Saunders Company (310 pages).
Publication of Clinical Dermatology of Dogs and Cats by T. Willemse (Netherlands).
Publication of Les Dermites Allergiques du Chien et du Chat by P. Prelaud
(France).
Publication of second edition of Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat by DJ. Grant
(United Kingdom).
Publication of Dermatology for the Small Animal Practitioner by G.H. Nesbitt and
L.J. Ackerman.
Publication of Techniques Diagnostiques en Dermatologie des Carnivores by E.
Cuaguere (France).
Publication of Skin Tumors of the Dog and Cat by M.H. Goldschmidt and F.S.
Shofer.
Publication of Veterinary Dermatopathology. A Macroscopic and Microscopic Eval-

Chronology of Veterinary Dermatology (1900-2000) • 1463

1992
1992

1993
1993
1993
1993
1994
1995

1995
1995

1995
1995
1995
1995
1995
1996
1997
1997
1997
1997
1997
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1998
1999
1999

uation of Canine and Feline Skin Diseases by T.L. Gross, PJ Ihrke, and KJ.
Walder.
The Second World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in May at
Montreal, Quebec.
The European College of Veterinary Dermatology was granted approval as a
certifying body in veterinary dermatology, and the following individuals were
elected as Invited Specialists ("grandfathers"): D. Carlotti, R Halliwell, H. Koch,
D. Lloyd, K. Thoday, and T. Willemse.
Publication of Current Veterinary Dermatology. The Science and Art of Therapy
by C.K Griffin, K.W. Kwochka, and J.M. MacDonald.
Publication of Manual of Small Animal Dermatology by P.H. Locke, RG. Harvey,
and I.S. Mason (United Kingdom).
Publication of second edition of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatology: A
Guide to Diagnosis by G.T. Wilkinson and R G. Harvey (United Kingdom).
Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. II, by P.J. Ihrke, I.S.
Mason, and S.D. White.
Publication of Color Atlas and Text of Surgical Pathology of the Dog and Cat:
Dermatopathology and Skin Tumors by J.A. Yager and B.P. Wilcock.
Publication of the fifth edition of Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology
(1,213 pages) by D.W. Scott, W.H. Miller, and C.K Griffin. Translated into
Portuguese and Spanish.
Publication of Dermatology (edited by V. A. Fadok), the Veterinary Clinics of
North America Equine Practice, 1995, W. B. Saunders Company (150 pages).
Publication of Feline Dermatology (edited by G. Kunkle), the Veterinary Clinics
of North America Small Animal Practice, 1995, W. B. Saunders Company
(246 pages).
Publication of Handbook of Small Animal Dermatology by K. A. Moriello and
I. S. Mason.
Formation of the study group, Omada Ktiniatrikis Dermatologias, in Greece.
Formation of the Italian Society of Veterinary Dermatology in Italy.
Formation of the Association of Veterinary Dermatology-Taipei in Taiwan.
Formation of the Arbeitskreis Veterinardermatologie in Austria.
The Third World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in September at
Edinburgh, Scotland.
Formation of Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Veterinardermatologie in Germany.
Publication of second edition of Allergic Skin Diseases of Dogs and Cats by L. M.
Reedy, W. H. Miller, Jr., and T. Willemse.
Publication of A Color Handbook of Skin Diseases in the Dog and Cat by P. J.
McKeever and R G. Harvey.
Publication of Color Atlas of Small Animal Dermatoses for Small Animal Practitioner by C. Chen (Taiwan).
Tony Stannard deceased July 2, 1997.
Publication of Canine and Feline Dermatology. Diagnosis and Treatment by G. H.
Nesbitt and L. Ackerman.
Publication of Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. III, by K. W. Kwochka,
T. Willemse, and C. von Tschamer.
Formation of Nihon Juhi Hifuka Gakkai in Japan.
Publication of A Color Handbook of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat by P. J.
McKeever and R G. Harvey.
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Dog by S. Paterson (United Kingdom).
Publication of Vade-Mecum de Dermatologie Veterinaire by G. Marignac
(France).
Publication of L.EPMATO !\IKA-ENL.OKPINO!\OIIA KAI METABO!\IKA
NOLHMATA by A. Koutinas (Greece).
Publication of Allergologie Canine by P. Prelaud (France).

1464 • Chronology of Veterinary Dennatology (1900-2000)

1999
1999
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

Publication of Manual of Equine Dermatology by R. R. R. Pascoe and D. C.
Knottenbelt.
Publication of Dermatology (edited by K. L. Campbell), the Veterinary Clinics of
North America Small Animal Practice, 1999, W. B. Saunders Company (215
pages).
Publication of Skin Diseases of the Cat by S. Paterson (United Kingdom).
Formation of the Brazilian Society of Veterinary Dermatology in Brazil.
Lloyd Reedy deceased. April 21, 2000.
The Fourth World Congress in Veterinary Dermatology was held in August!
September at San Francisco, California.
Publication of A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology by E. Cuaguere and P.
Prelaud (France).

Index

Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations; page numbers followed by t refer to tables.

Aaro-Perkins corpuscle, 44
Abamectin, 428
Abdomen, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Abelcet. See Amphotericin B lipid complex.
Abrasionis), epidermal, management of, 266-267
Abscess(es). See also Microabscesstes).
anal sac, 1197, 1202, 1203
definition of, 89
dermal, 187, 187
in actinobacillosis, 321-323
in cats, 276, 310-311
nonhealing or recurrent, 311
in dogs, 302, 310, 311
in hamsters, 1439
in rabbits, 1445
in rats, 1452
plague-related, 325-326
subcutaneous, helminthic infections and, 440
in cats, 310-311
in dogs, 302, 310,311
Absidia corymhifera, 384
Abyssinian cat, amyloidosis in, 767
cryptococcosis in, 395
griseofulvin side effects in, 357
grooming for, 215
hair disorder of, 109
hair shaft disorder of, 955, 955
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056, 1066
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Acanthocheilonoma infection, 435, 439-440, 440
Acanthocyte(s), 143
in cytologic diagnosis, 118t
Acantholysis, 143-147, 146, 147, 678
in pemphigus, 678-679
Acanthornats), infundibular keratinizing. See Keratoacanthoma.
Acanthosis, definition of, 134
true, 134
Acanthosis nigricans, 975-977
breed(s) with predilection for, 75
canine, 1007-1009, 1010
cause and pathogenesis of, 975-976
clinical features of, 964, 976
clinical management of, 253, 976-977
diagnosis of, 976
in dogs, 153
primary (idiopathic), 975
secondary, 975-976

Acarus [arris, in gerbils, 1428
Acarus siro, 451
Accutane. See 1sotretinoin.
Acetate tape impression, for ectoparasites,
107
for Malassezia spp., 368
Acetic acid, 227
otic therapy with, 1228
topical, 236, 356t
antifungal therapy with, 410
Achromotrichia, 96
Acid mantle, of skin, 31-32
Acid orcein-Giemsa (AOG) stain, 129, 130t
Acid phosphatase, in cell type identification, 204t
Acidophilts), 781
Acinetobacter spp., as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
in dogs, 33, 275
Acitretin, 241
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1029
for actinic keratosis, 1079
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1246
indications for, 1029
Acne, 1041-1043
canine, 303, 1041
feline, 1029,1039, 1042-1043,1043
clinical management of, 242
Acral lick dermatitis, 308, 1057, 1058-1064
acupuncture for, 1064
cause and pathogenesis of, 1058
clinical features of, 1058-1059, 1060
clinical management of, 1059-1064
cryosurgery for, 258, 1064
diagnosis of, 1059, 1061, 1062
electroshock for, 1064
laser therapy for, 1064
lesion in, treatment of, 1063-1064
organic disease and, 1058
psychological drug therapy for, 1061-1063
radiation therapy for, 1064
Acral lick furunculosis, 302, 308-309
Acral mutilation syndrome, 988-989, 995
Acremanium hyalinum, 377
Acrodermatitis, 988-989, 992-993
Acromegaly, 794- 795
cmtine, 825-827, 82~ 828
feline, 825, 827, 828
Acromelanlsrn, 8
feline, 1012-1013

1465

1466 • Index
ACTH, 17, 781
plasma levels of, determination of, 793
measurement of, 809
secretion of, excessive, 799
sex hormone response to, test for, 798
ACTH stimulation test, 791- 792
in hyperadrenocorticism, 809
sex hormone levels after, in dogs, 848~849, 850t
Actin,22t
Actinic keratosis, 1080, 1391-1392, 1393, 1394
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
in cats, 173
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
Actinin, 22t
Actinobacillosis (Actinobacillus infection), 321-323
diagnosis of, 125
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
Actinobacillus spp., in mice, 1442
Actinobacillus lignieresii, .321
Actinomyces spp., in abscesses in cats, 311
in mice, 1442
in oral flora of cats, 276
infections caused by, 276. See also Actinomycosis.
Actinomyces hordeooulneris, 321
Actinomyces meyeri, 321
Actinomyces odontolqticus, 321
Actinomyces viscosus, 321
Actinomycosis, 317, 321, 322
diagnosis of, 117, 125, 321
in ferrets, 1417
Acupuncture, 263
for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
Acyclovir, for feline rhinotracheitis, 525
Adapalene, 234, 241
Adapin. See Doxepin.
Adenitis. See Sebaceous adenitis.
Adenocarcinoma, adrenocortical, in cats, 815
in dogs, 799
colonic, cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373, 1374
eyelid, 1190
jejunal, cutaneous metastases of, 1373-1374
mammary, 1021
cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
pituitary, in cats, 815
in dogs, 799
Adenohypophysis, 780
Adenomats), adrenocortical, in cats, 815
in dogs, 799
eyelid, 1190
pituitary, in cats, 815
in dogs, 799
sebaceous gland, 1029
clinical management of, 242
in dogs, 1271, 1272
in gerbils, 1429-1430
sweat gland, 1279
in hamsters, 1442
Adenosine triphosphatase, in cell type identification, 204t
Adherens junction(s), 19, 22t
Adhesion moleculeis), 545, 549t
Adipocyte(s). See Lipocyte(s).
Adipose tissue, 63, 63
Adnexal (pilosebaceous) nevi, 1384-1386,1385
Adrenal function testis), 790-794
in canine hyperadrenocorticism, 807-810
in feline hyperadrenocorticism, 816-818
Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome, 846-851
cause and pathogenesis of, 846- 847

Adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome (Continued)
clinical features of, 847, 847-848, 848
clinical management of, 849-851
diagnosis of, 848-849, 849, 850t
Adrenal sex hormone imbalancets), 845-846, 854
breed(s) with predilection for, 75
in dogs, 842
Adrenalectomy, in cats, 818-819
in dogs, 811
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (corticotropin). See ACTH.
Advantage. See 1midacloprid.
Adverse drug reaction, cutaneous. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Adverse food reaction. See Food hypersensitivity.
Affenpinscher, follicular dysplasia in, 971
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
Afghan hound. See Hound, Afghan.
Age, and drug absorption, 220
and graying, 1014
and risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders, 75, 76t
and skin immune system, 560-561
skin changes with, 64-65, 65
Agouti hair, 8
Aguirre's syndrome, 1021
Airedale. See Terrier, Airedale.
Akita, amyloidosis in, 767
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1142, 1143,
1143
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686, 687
postclipping alopecia in, 898
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 748-749, 757
Alabama rot. See Greyhound.
Alaskan malamute. See Malamute.
Albinism, 17, 1014
Alcaligenes spp., as transient flora, in cats, 275
Alcian blue, staining characteristics of various substances
with, 130t
Alcoholts), antipruritic therapy with, 229-230
in shampoo, 223
in topical therapy, 230
Aleuroconidia, 337
Alkaline phosphatase, in cell type identification, 204t
in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
AIlergen(s), alum-precipitated, for hyposensitization of
dogs, 599
aqueous, for hyposensitization of dogs, 597-599,
598t
emulsion, for hyposensitization of dogs, 599
Allergic breakthrough, 579
Allergic contact dermatitis. See Contact hypersensitivity
(allergic contact dermatitis).
Allergic inhalant dermatitis. See Atopy.
Allergroom, 229t, 235, 917, 1035
Allergy. See also Atopy.
and bacterial infection, 277
breedis) with predilection for, 75
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
drug. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
food. See Food hypersensitivity.
Allergy test(s), in canine flea bite hypersensitivity, 630-631
in vitro, 589-592, 59lt
in feline atopy, 606
intradermal, 584-589, 59lt
allergen selection for, ,585-588
false-negative, causes of, 587t, 587-588
false-positive, causes of, 587t, 587-588

Index· 1467
Allergy testis) (Continued)
in feline atopy, 605-606
procedure for, 588-589
serologic, 589-592, 59lt
in feline atopy, 606
D-trans-Allethrin, 426
Allopurinol, for leishmaniasis, 538
Aloe vera, topical therapy with, 236
Alopecia, 6, 87, 92. See also Demodicosis, in dogs; Hair;
Melanoderma and alopecia; Telogen defluxion.
acquired, 887-911
anagen defluxion and. See Anagen defluxion.
canine, acquired, 887-899, 888, 889
drug-induced, 722t
in follicular dysplasia, 890
in injection reaction, 896
in trichorrhexis nodosa, 895, 895, 906
minoxidil in, 874
pinnal, 887, 888, 889
topical steroid-induced, 889, 896, 896-897
chronic radiant heat dermatitis and, 897-899
cicatricial, 897
color dilution. See Color dilution alopecia.
color mutant. See Color dilution alopecia.
congenital, 956- 965
in hamsters, 1441
in rabbits, 1450, 14.50
in rats, 1454, 1454
cyclic follicular dysplasia and, 890-893
definition of, 85
dermatophytosis and, 342-347, 344-345, 346
excessive shedding and, 894
exfoliative dermatitis and thymoma in cats and,
905
feline, acquired, 900-911
endocrine, 851
in follicular dysplasia, 905
in injection reaction, 902
in trichorrhexis nodosa, 905, 905-907, 906
pinnal, 888, 900
preauricular, 888, 900
psychogenic, 1060-1061, 1066-1070
cause and pathogenesis of, 1066
clinical features of, 1060-1061, 1067, 1068
clinical management of, 1069-1070
diagnosis of, 1067-1069,1069
symmetric, 888, 900-902
topical steroid-induced, 902, 903
focal, 86
follicular dysplasia and, canine, 890
feline, 905
follicular lipidosis of Rottweilers and, 899, 899, 900
hereditary. See Alopecia, congenital.
hyperadrenocorticism and, 780
hypothyroidism and, 780, 783- 784
idiopathic lymphocytic mural folliculitis in cats and, 907909,907-910
in ferrets, breeding season and, 1425
hyperestrogenism and, 1424-1425, 1425
miscellaneous causes of, 1426-1427
testicular neoplasia and, 1425
in guinea pigs, 1437, 1438
in mice, 1444
in rex mutant cats, 9
injection reaction and, 92, 896, 902
medullary trichomalacia and, 895
paraneoplastic, 902, 903, 904
pattern baldness and, 890

Alopecia (Continued)
periocular, in leishmaniasis, 534
pinnal, canine, 887, 888, 889
feline, 888, 900
postclipping, 897, 898
preauricular, feline, 888, 900
primary, 86
psychogenic, hair examination in, 109
seasonal flank, 890-893, 891, 892
secondary, 86
short hair syndrome of silky breeds and, 888, 897
superficial bacterial folliculitis and, 293- 294
tardive, 965-974
telogen defluxion and. See Telogen defluxion.
topical steroid-induced, in cats, 902, 903
in dogs, 889, 896, 896-897
traction, 888, 894-895
traumatic, in hamsters, 1440
trichoptilosis and, 895
trichorrhexis nodosa and, in cats, 905, 905-907, 906
in dogs, 895, 895, 906
Alopecia areata, 198-199,201, 761-763
cause and pathogenesis of, 761
clinical features of, 761, 762-764
clinical management of, 763
definition of, 761
diagnosis of, 671, 761-762
hair examination in, 108, 111
histopathology of, 762- 763, 764
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1450-1451, 1452
in rats, 1455
Alopecia mucinosa, in cats, 909-911, 910-911
in dogs, 899
Alopecia X, 843-845
Alternaria spp., 387
colonies of, morphology of, 123
dermatitis caused by, 387, 391, 392
in normal flora, 338, 338t
in dogs, 34
Alternaria altemata, 379, 391
Alternaria tenuissima, 391
Alternative therapyiies), 263
Aluminum acetate, otic therapy with, 1228
Aluminum acetate solution (Burow's solution; Domeboro),
227, 229t, 230
Amblyomma maculatum, 444
American Holistic Veterinary Medical Association, 263
Aminoglycoside(s), otic therapy with, 1227
Aminosidin, for leishmaniasis, 538
Amitraz, 427
adverse effects and side effects of, 425, 471-472, 473,
573,725
therapy with, antiparasitic, 425
for canine demodicosis, 470-472, 473
for canine scabies, 482
for feline demodicosis, 474, 475, 476
for feline scabies, 484
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic, 1229
regulation of, 424
Amitriptyline, 1056-1057
for feline psyehogenic alopecia, 1070
Amoxicillin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,
282
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
Amoxicillin-c1avulanate, adverse effects and side effects of,
725, 727

1468 • Index
Arnoxicillin-clavulanate (Continued)
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
long-term therapy with, 287
systemic, dosage of, 284, 284t
Amphotericin B, adverse effects and side effects of, 414
antifungal therapy with, 414
for leishmaniasis, 538
resistance to, 414
topical, 356t, 409
Amphotericin B lipid complex, 414
Ampicillin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,
282
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Amyloid, dermal deposits of, 160
Amyloid-A, 767
Amyloid-L,766
Amyloidosis, 766-769, 768, 769
definition of, 766
nodular, 769
paraneoplastic, 1375
Amyloid-P, 766
Anaerobic bacteria. See Bacteria, anaerobic.
Anaerobic cellulitis, 302, 310
Anafranil. See Clomipramine.
Anagen, 5, 5, 6, 46, 46, 48
hypothyroidism and, 783
stages of, 46
Anagen defluxion, 893, 893-894
hair examination in, 108, 109
Anal area, cryosurgery in, 258
Anal licking, 1066, 1067
Anal sac(s), abscess of, 1127, 1202, 1203
anatomyof,1200-1201
diseases of, 1201-1202
clinical features of, 1202
clinical management of, 1202-1203
expression of, 211, 1202
impaction of, 1201
clinical management of, 1202
infections of, 1201
clinical management of, 1202-1203
neoplasia of, 1202
secretions of, 1201, 1201t
Anaplasia, definition of, 174
Anaplasmosis, 444
Anatrichosoma cutaneum, 436
Anatrichosomiasis, 436, 437
Anchoring flbriks), 35, 36t
Ancobon. See Flucytosine.
Ancylostoma spp., pododermatitis caused by, 305
Ancylostoma braziliense, 431
in humans, 432
Ancylostoma caninum, 431, 432
in humans, 432
Ancylostoma dermatitis, 431-432, 432
Androgen(s), 796-797
and acne, 1041
blood levels of, assays for, 797
Androgen-estrogen therapy, for feline acquired symmetric
alopecia, 901-902
Anemia, feline infectious, 531
in hypothyroidism, 858, 860
Anesthesia, for biopsy, 128
Angioedema, 91, 571-574
cause and pathogenesis of, 571, 572t
clinical features of, 572, 573

Angioedema (Continued)
clinical management of, 574
drug-induced, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
Angiogenesis, regulation of, 56
Angiokeratoma, 1303-1304, 1304
Angiolipoma, 1309, 1311
Angioma. See Lymphangioma.
Angiosarcoma. See Hemangiosarcoma; Lymphangiosarcoma.
Angora rabbit, myxomatosis in, 1446
Anipryl. See L-Deprenyl.
Annelloconidia, 337
Anonychia, definition of, 1193t
Anoplura, characteristics of, 487
Antts), 506-507
Antibioticts), and steroids, combination therapy with, 280,
284-285
antiinflammatory properties of, 285
concentration-dependent, 283
costs of, 283
distribution of, in skin, 281
efficacy of, factors affecting, 281
for canine neosporosis, 533
for leishmaniasis, 538
for malodorous dogs, 214
for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
for small animals, 1418t
immunomodulatory properties of, 285
in shampoo, 223
long-term therapy with, 287-288
suboptimal protocols for, 287-288
otic preparations of, 1226t, 1227
otic therapy with, 1227, 1229
resistance to, 282
selection of, factors affecting, 282- 283
systemic, course of treatment with, 284
dosage of, 284, 284t
duration of therapy with, 285
for bacterial infections, 281-285
time-dependent, 283
topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1226-1227
potentiation of, with EDTA-Tris, 280
Antibodyites), homocytotropic, 562
reaginic, 561-562
skin-sensitizing, 562
Antidepressantts), 1056-1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061
for hypersensitivity disorders, 569-570
Antifungal therapy, 409-415
in small animals, 1418t
otic, 1226t, 1228
rinses for, 410
shampoos for, 409-410
spot treatments in, 409
systemic, 356-358, 357t, 410-415
topical, 218t, 354-356, 356t, 409-410
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1227
Antihistamine(s), 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061
for hypersensitivity disorders, 567-569, 569t
Anti-inflammatory agenns), in topical therapy, 218t, 232233, 233t, 234t
nonsteroidal, for hypersensitivity disorders, 566-567
systemic, 238-239
Antimalarial agentts), for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
immunosuppressive therapy with, 677-678

Index' 1469
Antimicrobial agent(s), otic preparations of, 1226t, 1227
topical, 218t, 230-232
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1227
Antimicrobial-glucocorticoid agentts), topical, for ear treatment, 1226t, 1226-1227
Antimycotic(s). See Antifungal therapy.
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test, for systemic lupus erythematosus, 706
Antioxidantts), 209
Antiparasitic agent(s), 423-430
in small animals, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1227t, 1228
systemic, 427-430
topical, 218t, 424-427
for ear treatment, 1226t, 1228-1229
Antipruritic agentts), systemic, nonsteroidal, 238-239
topical, 218t, 228-230, 229t
Antiseborrheic agent(s), 1025-1030
systemic, 1028
topical, 218t, 227-228, 1025-1028
Antiseptic agent(s), 230
otic therapy with, 1228
topical, for ear treatment, 1227
aI-Antitrypsin, in cell type identification, 204t
Anus, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t105t, 105t
Anxiolytic agent(s), 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061
Aplasia cutis, 936
Apocrine sweat gland(s). See Sweat glandes), epitrichial
(apocrine).
Apoptosis, 138-140,142
definition of, 138
in catagen, 48
Apoptotic body(ies), 140
Arachidonic acid, 30, 208, 239, 1113
Arachnid(s), 440-485
hypersensitivity to, 636- 642
Aralen. See Chloroquine.
Arctium spp.. See Burdock.
Argentaffin stainfs), 19
Argyrophil stain(s), 19
Armadillo Westie syndrome, 914, 928-929, 930, 932, 933
Arofylline, for canine atopy, 601
Arrector pili muscle, 41, 42, 43, 55, 55
age-related changes in, 64, 65
innervation of, 59
Arsenic toxicosis, 1101
Arteriolets), cutaneous, 56
Arteriovenous anastomoses, 56-57
Arteriovenous fistula, 1095-1096
Arthroconidia, 121, 337, 351
Arthropod parasite(s), 440-500
Ascaris infection, claw involvement in, 1195
Ascorbic acid. See Vitamin C.
Aspergillosis, 403
in rabbits, 1446
nasal, 397, 403
Aspergillus spp., 337
colonies of, morphology of, 123
culture of, 121
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
examination for, specimen collection for, 119
in normal flora, 34, 338, 338t
otitis extema caused by, 1214t
Aspergillus deflectus, 403
Aspergillus dermatitis, 397, 403-404
Aspergillus flavipes, 403

Aspergillus flavus, 403
Aspergillus fumigatus, 403
Aspergillus nidulans, 403
Aspergillus niger, 397, 403
Aspergillus terreus, 403
Asthenia, cutaneous (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, dermatosparaxis), 159, 978, 979-984, 980
cause and pathogenesis of, 979-982, 980, 981
clinical features of, 980, 982
clinical management of, 983-984
definition of, 979
diagnosis of, 982-983, 983
in dogs, 159
in rabbits, 1450, 1451
types of, 979, 979t
Astringent(s), in topical therapy, 218t, 226-227
Atabrine hydrochloride. See Quinacrine hydrochloride.
Atarax. See Hydroxyzine.
Atopy. See also Allergy.
and canine demodicosis, co-occurrence of, 473
and contact hypersensitivity, 1081
and Malassezia dermatitis, 365, 374
canine, 205, 574-601
avoidance as therapy for, 595-597
basophil degranulation test in, 592
cause and pathogenesis of, 574-581
client education about, 595
clinical features of, 581-583, 582, 584
clinical management of, 244, 593-601
diagnosis of, 152, 583-593
diagnostic criteria for, 592-593
environmental management for, 595-597, 596t
experimental therapies for, 601
histopathology of, 593, 594
hyposensitization for, 597-601, 598t
intradermal allergy testing in, 584-589, 59lt
serologic allergy tests in, 589-592, 59lt
systemic antipruritic agents for, 601
topical therapy for, 597-601
clinical management of, 239, 244, 593-601, 607-608,
609t
cytologic diagnosis of, 114, 117
feline, 184, 601-608
allergy testing in, 605-606
basophil degranulation test in, 606
cause and pathogenesis of, 602
clinical features of, 602-603, 604
clinical management of, 607-608, 609t
diagnosis of, 603-607, 605
histopathology of, 606-607, 607
hyposensitization for, 608, 609t
serum in vitro testing in, 606
foot licking in, 1066
in ferrets, 1426, 1427
insects and, 486-487
Atrophy, epidermal, 135-136, 140
epithelial, 197-199
follicular, 166, 167
in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
of connective tissue, 197-199
of dermal collagen, 159
of dermal elastin, 159
Aural cholesteatoma, 1216
Auranofin, immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 675676
Aureobasidium spp., in normal flora, of dogs, 338, 338t
Auricular chondritis, canine, 759, 759- 760

1470 • Index
Auricular chondritis (Continued)
feline, 748-749, 759-760, 760
in rats, 1454
Aurothioglucose, immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t,
675-676
Aurotrichia, acquired, 1008, 1022
in miniature Schnauzers, 978
Australian shepherd. See Shepherd, Australian.
Austrobilharzia variglandis, 436
Autoantibodyues), in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
Autoimmune dermatosis, 667, 678-769
classification of, 670
cytologic diagnosis of, 114, 117,667-671
otitis extema caused by, 1206t, 1212
Autoimmune subepidermal bullous dermatosis, 694-701
Aveeno, 229t, 230, 236
Avermectin(s), 428, 445
Avoidance, of allergens, as therapy for hypersensitivity,
563, 595-597
of sun. See Sun avoidance.
Axilla, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Azathioprine, adverse effects and side effects of, 673-674
antiseborrheic effects of, 920
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for graft-versus-host disease, 720
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma,
1139-1140
for pemphigus, 681
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689-690
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 673-674
Azithromycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Azium. See Dexamethasone.
Azolets), antifungal therapy with, 411-413
drug interactions with, 412
mechanism of action of, 411
topical, 409
Azulfidine. See SulJasalazine.

Babesia canis, 534
Babesia gibsoni, 534
Babesia vogeli, 534
Babesiosis, 444
canine, 530-531, 534
Bacillus spp., as resident microflora, in dogs, 275
as transient flora, in cats, 275
in dogs, 275
Bacitracin, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Back, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Bacquiloprim-sulfadimethoxine, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Bacteria, adhesion of, 276
aerobic, cellulitis caused by, 309-310
gram-negative, as resident flora, in dogs, 34, 275
anaerobic, 276
cellulitis caused by, 302, 310
in abscesses in cats, 311
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
otitis media caused by, 1214t
and acne, 1041
antibacterial sensitivity of, 276
culture of, indications for, 125
specimen collection for, 125
extracellular, in cytologic diagnosis, 115, 118t
gram-negative, as resident flora, in dogs, 34, 275

Bacteria (Continued)
hypersensitivity to, 637, 647-650,649
in normal flora, 274
resident, 274-275
numbers of, 276-277
transient, 274-277
in surface debris, 155, 155
intracellular, in cytologic diagnosis, 113, 117, 118t
L-forms, infections caused by, 327
otitis externa caused by, 1210, 1213, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
phagocytosed, 113
susceptibility testing of, indications for, 125
Bacterial colonization, and infection, comparison of, 277
cytologic identification of, 116, 118t
Bacterial infection(s), 277-278. See also Pyoderma.
and bacterial colonization, comparison of, 277
causes of, 277
deep, 298-324
cytologic findings in, 117
treatment of, 285
diagnosis of, 125
cytologic, 113, 116, 118t, 125
in cats, systemic therapy for, 281, 282
in dogs, 188
systemic therapy for, 281
in ferrets, 1417, 1418
in gerbils, 1428
in guinea pigs, 1418, 1420, 1430
in hamsters, 1418, 1439
in mice, 1442
in rabbits, 1444-1446
in rats, 1452-1453
metabolic causes of, 278
mixed, antibiotic therapy for, 283
primary, 278
recurrence of, 278
antibiotic therapy for, 283
chronic, management of, 286-288
relapse of, 285
secondary, 277
superficial, 288- 298
surface, 288
treatment of, 279-288
re-examination during, 285
systemic, 281, 282
topical, 279-281
Bacterial overgrowth, 117
Bacterinis), autogenous staphylococcal, 286
Bacteroides spp., cellulitis caused by, 310
in infections, 276
in oral flora of cats, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Baldness, pattern, 890, 954, 963-964, 965-966, 966
clinical management of, 253
Balinese cat, acromelanism in, 1012-1013
hair color of, 8
Ballooning degeneration, epidermal, 142-143,145
Banamine. See Flunixin meglumine.
Barbering, in gerbils, 1429
in gninea pigs, 1437
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1450
in rats, 1454
Barrier function, of hair, 31, 274
of skin, 31
Bartonella hinselar, 493
Basal cell carcinoma, 1261-1263,1262

Index > 1471
Basal cell carcinoma (Continued)
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
clear cell, 1262
in hamsters, 1442
in rabbits, 1451
in rats, 1455
keratinizing, 1262
melanotic, 1262, 1262
solid, 1262
with sebaceous differentiation, 1271
Basal cell plasma membrane, 34
Basal cell tumorts), 1013, 1021, 1259-1263
benign feline, 1254, 1260-1261, 1261
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
solid. See Neuroendocrine tumoris), primary cutaneous.
Basal lamina, of basement membrane zone. See Lamina
densa (basal lamina).
Basement membrane zone, epidermal, 11, 13
components of, 34-35, 36t
functions of, 34
thickened, 172, 172
ultrastructure of, 34-35, 35
follicular (glassy membrane), 43, 47, 49
Basenji, immunoproliferative enteropathy of, 760-761
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Basidiobolus spp., 384
Basophil(s), 781. See also Hypersensitivity, cutaneous basophil.
functions of, 558
in cytologic diagnosls, 114, 117, 118t
Basophil degranulation test, 592
in feline atopy, 606
Basosquamous carcinoma. See Basal cell carcinoma, keratinizing.
Basset hound. See Hound, Basset.
Bathing. See also Grooming.
of cats, 215, 1038
of dogs, 212-213
preparation for, 210-211
of seborrheic animal, 916-918, 1035-1036, 1038
Beagle, acromegaly in, 826
actinic keratoses in, 1391
amyloidosis in, 767
atopy in, 575
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
cell proliferation kinetics in, 7
colloid milium in, 1178
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
familial vasculopathy in, 987
hair growth in, daily, 6
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
lymphocytic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis in, 851
mast cell tumors in, 1320
oral papillomatosis in, 1240
Pelodera dermatitis in, 435
pododermatitiS in, 344-345
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 76, 77t
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
solar dermatitis in, 1079
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
trichomycosis axillaris in, 327
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Beauceron, atopy in, 581
dermatomyositis in, 940

Beauceron (Continued)
epidermolysis bullosa in, dystrophic, 939
junctional, 939
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 706
Bedlington terrier. See Terrier, Bedlington.
Beeis), 505-506
Behavioral changets), in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
Belgian sheepdog. See Sheepdog, Belgian (Belgian Tervuren).
.
Belgian Tervuren. See Sheepdog, Belgian (Belgian Tervuren).
Bendiocarb, 425
Benzalkonium chloride, 232
in shampoo, 223
Benzodiazepine(s), 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061
Benzoyl peroxide, 228, 231
adverse effects and side effects of, 231
antiseborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027, 1036
in gels, 226
in shampoo, 223
topical, for bacterial infection, 279- 280
Benzoyl-Plus, 231
Berger de Beauce, risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in,
77t
Bernese mountain dog, color dilution alopecia in, 967
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 1352
histiocytosis of, 189
malignant histiocytosis in, 1346
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
snow nose in, 1017
systemic histiocytosis in, 1346, 1352
Betadine. See Povidone-iodine.
Betamethasone, adrenocortical suppression by, 232
adverse effects and side effects of, 232
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
injectable, 247t
otic therapy with, 1226
Betamethasone-17-valerate, adrenocortical suppression by,
232
Betasone. See Betamethasone.
Bichon Frise, congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
drug reactions in, 721
epiphora in, 1188
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
vaccine reaction in, 744
Bioallethrin, 426
Biopsy, 125-131
anesthesia for, 128
artifacts in, 130-131, 131, 148,149
complications of, 128-129
excisional, 128
in bacterial infection, 285
in claw disease, 1200
in demodicosis, 467-469
in dermatophytosis, 349
in hypothyroidism, 859, 861
in immune-mediated skin disease, 668
in leishmaniasis, 536, 536, 537
in Malassezia dermatitis, 370, 370-372
in pemphigus complex, 681
indications for, 125-126, 278
instruments for, 127
"nonspecific" findings in, 201- 202
pattern analysis in, 177-178
punch, 127-128

1472 • Index
Biopsy (Continued)
site for, 126-127
specimen in, collection of, 127
fixation of, 129
handling of, 128, 129
special procedures for, 202-204
staining of, 129, 130t
technique for, 127-128
thyroid, 788
timing of, 126
Biotin, deficiency of, 1118
in ferrets, 1426
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1453
supplementation of, in claw disease, 1200
Bipolaris spiciferum, 379
Birbeck's granule(s), 24
Birman cat, cold agglutinin disease in, 717
congenital hypotrichosis in, 959, 960
hair color of, 8
Bite wound(s), abscesses caused by, in cats, 310-311
in guinea pigs, 1437
in hamsters, 1439
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1454
Bitter apple, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Black flies, 502
bites of, 501, 502, 502, 503
Black hair follicular dysplasia, 959-965
cause and pathogenesis of, 962
clinical features of, 954, 962
definition of, 959
diagnosis of, 962-965, 963
Black widow spider, 484
Black-legged tick(s), 444
Blaschko's lines, 9
Blastoconidia, 336-337
Blastomyces dermatitidls, 337, 391-392
culture of, 121
Blastomycosis, 387, 391-394
cause of, 391-392
claw involvement in, 1195
clinical findings in, 387, 392-393, 393, 401
clinical management of, 393
diagnosis of, 393, 393, 394
European. See Cryptococcosis.
in cats, 393, 401
in dogs, 387, 392-393
in ferrets, 1419
pathogenesis of, 391-392
pododennatitis caused by, 305
public health considerations with, 394
Blepharitis, 1185-1186, 1187
definition of, 1185
in aspergillosis, 397, 403
Blister(s). See also Bulla/bullae; Vesicle(s).
tug-of-war, 1103
Blood pressure, in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
Blood vesselts), cutaneous, 56, 56-58, 57. See also
Vasculitis.
histologic changes in, 171
disorders of, 987-992
innervation of, 59, 60
Blowflies, 503
Blue ferret syndrome, 1426-1427
Body fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
Body temperature. See Heat, body; Temperature.
Boerboel, dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936

Borrelia burgdorferi, 326-327
and morphea, 1146
Borreliosis, Lyme, 326-327
Borzoi, antithyroglobulin antibodyiies) in, 852
antithyroid antibody(ies) in, 789
lymphedema in, 990
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Boston terrier. See Terrier, Boston.
Botryomycosis (cutaneous bacterial granuloma, bacterial
pseudomycetoma),302, 311-312, 313
in mice, 1442
Bouvier de Flanders, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome
in, 850
follicular dysplasia in, 971
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Bowen's disease, 1244,1254, 1258-1259,1259,1260
pigmented plaque in, 1013, 1013
Boxer, alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
anatrichosomiasis in, 436
atopy in, 581
calcinosis circumscripta in, 1400
callus dermatitis in, 1102
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
coccidioidomycosis in, 394
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 1378
distichiasis in, 1188
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
estrogen-responsive dermatosis of, 829
fibromas in, 1282
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
food hypersensitivity in, 618
haircoat of, 7
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
histiocytomas in, 1347
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
hypothyroidism in, 852, 853
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in,
1136
interstitial cell tumors in, 843
lymphomas in, 1331
mast cell tumors in, 1320
melanocytoma in, 1359
multiple collagenous cysts in, and renal pathology, 1383
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
papillomas in, 1240
pododennatitisin,305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 76, 77t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 823, 890, 893
seminoma in, 843
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
white, truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
Brachycladium spiciferum. See Bipolaris spiciferum.
Brachyonychia, definition of, 1193t
Brachytherapy, noninvasive, for squamous cell carcinoma,
1257
Branchial cystis), 1382
Breeding season alopecia, in ferrets, 1425
Brewer's yeast, indications for, in canine neosporosis, 533
Brittany spaniel. See Spaniel, Brittany.
Bromocriptine mesylate, 811

Index' 1473
Bronchogenic carcinoma, 1089-1090
cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1374, 1375
Brown recluse spider, 484
Brown-Brenn stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Brucella canis, 325
Brucellosis, 325
canine, 613
Brushing, 210
Bubblies, subepidermal. See Subepidermal vacuolar alteration.
Bulbitis, 195, 201
Bull mastiff. See Mastiff, bull.
Bull terrier. See Terrier, bull.
Bullalbullae, 87, 90, 148
Bulldog, English, calcinosis cutis in, 1399
demodicosis in, 461, 465
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
hyperestrogenism in, 829
hypothyroidism in, 852
intertrigo in, facial fold, 1107
tail fold, 1107
lymphedema in, 990
Malassezia dermatitis in, 348-349
mast cell tumors in, 1320
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
pododermatitis in, 305
postclipping alopecia in, 898
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 78t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 823, 890, 891
seborrhea in, 913
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
superficial bacterial folliculitis in, 294, 296
French, congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
lentigo in, 1007
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
Bullous dermatosis, autoimmune subepidermal, 694-701
Bullous pemphigoid, 694- 700
causes of, 13, 694-695
claw involvement in, 1195
clinical features of, 695-697, 696-697
clinical management of, 698- 700
diagnosis of, 670, 671, 697, 698, 699
drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
in dogs, 194
pathogenesis of, 694-695
Bullous pemphigoid antigen(s), 36t, 694
1 (BPAG I), 13, 22t, 694
II (BPAG II), 13, 22t, 694
Burdock, glossitis caused by, 1091, 1092
skin lesions caused by, 1091, 1092, 1094, 1095
stomatitis caused by, 1091, 1092
Burkholderia pseudomallei, 328
Burmese cat, acromelanism in, 1012-101.3
congenital hypotrichosis in, 959
demodicosis in, 474
grooming for, 215
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
Burn(s),1082, 1083-1087
cause and pathogenesis of, 1083-1084
clinical features of, 1082, 1084-1085
clinical management of, 1085-1087,1086-1087
diagnosis of, 1085, 1085
full-thickness, 1084
partial-thickness, 1084

Burn(s) (Continued)
radiant heat, 1086-1087, 1087
scar from, 97
Burow's solution (aluminum acetate solution; Domeboro),
227, 229t, 230
Burrowing, in ferrets, 1427
Buspirone (BuSpar), 1057
Butoxypropylene glycol, 427

Cadherints), 22t, 545
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Cairn terrier. See Terrier, Cairn.
Caladryl, 229, 229t
Calcinosis circumscripta, 1393, 1399, 1400-1401,1401
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
Calcinosis cutis, 1106, 1108, 1108, 1398t, 1398-1401
dystrophic, 789
idiopathic, 1398t, 1399, 1399
in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 802, 804, 815
metastatic, 1398t, 1398-1399
widespread, 1399
Calcipotriene, antiseborrheic therapy with, 1030
Calcipotriol, antiseborrheic therapy with, 1030
Calcitriol, antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1030
Calcium, percutaneous penetration of, 1399
Calcium-calmodulin interactions, 20
Caldesmon, 20
Calendula, 263
Calicivirus infection, feline, 525
Calliphorids, 503
Callus, 87, 100, 1092,1101-1102
Callus dermatitis and pyoderma, 1097, 1102-1103
Candida spp., culture of, 362
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
identification of, 362
in normal flora, 361
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
Candida albicans, 361
colonies of, morphology of, 123
hypersensitivity to, 650
in cytologic diagnosis, 115, 117
Candida gulliennondii, 361
Candida krusei, 361
Candida parapsilosis, 361
Candida pseudotropicalis, 361
Candida stellatoidea, 361
Candida tropicalis, 361
Candida zeqlanoides, in dogs, 362
Candidiasis, 361- 363
cause of, 361
clinical findings in, 348, 348-349, 362
clinical management of, 362-363
diagnosis of, 362, 363
in cats, 362
in dogs, 348, 348-349, 362
in guinea pigs, 1431
pathogenesis of, 361
pododermatitis caused by, 305
topical therapy for, 409
Candidosis. See Candidiasis.
Canine disorder(s). See specific disorder.
Canthaxanthin, 254
Capillarylies), cutaneous, 56
in fat, 63
Capitulum, definition of, 440
Caprylic acid, 235
Capsaicin (HEET), for acral lick dermatitis, 1063

1474 • Index
Carbamate(s), topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Carbamide peroxide, 1223
Carbaryl, 425
Carbowax 1500, 226
Carcinoid syndrome, 1052
Carcinoma, basal cell. See Basal cell carcinoma.
basosquamous. See Basal cell carcinoma, keratinizing.
bronchogenic, cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1374, 1375
ceruminal gland, 1196, 1208, 1208, 1209
epidermoid. See Squamous cell carcinoma.
gastric, 1021
metastatic, claw involvement in, 1198
pharyngeal, cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
prostatic, cutaneous metastases of, 1374, 1374
sebaceous, in rabbits, 1451
sebaceous gland, in dogs, 1271
squamous cell. See Squamous cell carcinoma.
sweat gland, 1198
Carnelian bear dog, hypopituitarism in, 811
pituitary dwarfism in, 819
,a-Carotene, 209, 254
skin color change caused by, 1023
Carprofen, adverse reaction to, 721
Caryosporosis, canine, 532, 533
Castration-responsive dermatosis, 843-845
Catis). See also Feline; individual species.
abscesses in, 276
acquired skin fragility syndrome of, 199, 1170-1173,
1171-1172
agouti,8
breeds of, alopecic, 957, 957-958
with predilection for skin disorders, 75, 77t-82t
cutaneous mast cells of, 39, 40
deafness in, 8
epidermis of, 10
immunoglobulins of, 31
footpad of, 12
furunculosis in, 300, 302
grooming for, haircoat type and, 215
special problems in, 215
hair color of, 8-9
and personality, 9
Maltese dilution and, 9
hair follicles of, 10
hair growth in, annual, 4
daily, 6
hair of, length of, 9
types of, 8-9
haircoat of, pointed, 8
tipped, 8
types of, 215
household, resident flora of, 275
immunomodulation in, 287
Langerhans' cells of, 24
mechanoreceptors in, 61
normal microflora of. See Microflora.
oral flora of, 276
orange, lentigo simplex in, 1006-1007, 1008, 1009
perforating dermatitis in, 1168-1170, 1169, 1170
piebald, 8
white spotting in, 8
plague in, 325-326
preauricular ulcerative dermatitis of, idiopathic, 1177
rex mutant of, 9
sarcoid in, 1285, 1288, 1289
secondary hairs of, 4
skin of, normal pH of, 3
thickness of, 3

Cat(s) (Continued)
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
stratum corneum in, thickness of, 28
sweating in, 53
tabby, 8
Abyssinian pattern of, 8
blotch pattern of, 8
mackerel pattern of, 8
tail gland of, 55
thermoregulation in, respiratory rate and, 54
saliva and, 54
tortoiseshell, 8
white, squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
with blue eyes, 8
white-eared, pinna of, risk for skin disorders in, 76
wire-hair mutation in, 9
zinc deficiency in, 1122
Cat food, fat in, 1112
Cat fur mitets), 446, 447
skin scraping for, 101, 107
Catagen, 5, 5-6, 47, 48
Catan Dog's tag, 498
Catapres. See Clonidine.
Cateninis), 20, 22t
Caterpillar(s), dermatitis caused by, 507, 507
Cathelicidins, 33
CD antigen(s), in cell type identification, 204t
Cediopsylla simplex, on rabbits, 1449
Cefadroxil, adverse effects and side effects of, 725
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Cell death, 136-137
programmed (spontaneous), 138-139
Cell envelope, of corneocytes, 28, 29
Cell typets), identification of, markers for, 204t
Cellular mfiltratels), dermal, 177
Cellulitis, 299-300
aerobic, 309-310
anaerobic, 302, 310
canine juvenile (pyoderma, puppy strangles, sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphedema), 328, 11631167
cause and pathogenesis of, 1164
clinical features of, 1158, 1165
clinical management of, 1166-1167
definition of, 1163
diagnosis of, 1165, 1165-1166,1166
otitis externa caused by, 1213
clostridial, 302
staphylococcal, in dogs, 324-325
Cephalexin, adverse effects and side effects of, 197, 724725,735
distribution of, in skin, 281
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, dosage of, 284, 284t
Cephalosporin(s), adverse effects and side effects of,
721
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci,
282
long-term therapy with, 287
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Ceramidets), 30-31
Cerumen, immunoglobulins in, 1204
Ceruminal gland(s), carcinoma of, 1196
neoplasia of, 1196-1197, 1208, 1208-1209,1209
Ceruminolyticts), 1222t, 1222-1223, 1223
Chalazion, 1186-1188
Chamomile, 263

Index
Chediak-Higashl syndrome, 977, 1014
diagnosis of, 76
Chemoattractant(s), for neutrophils, 557, 557t
Chemokinets), 545, 547t-548t
Chemotherapy, for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257-1258
Cheque Drops, 838
Chesapeake Bay retriever. See Retriever, Chesapeake Bay.
Chest, lower, common and less common dermatoses of,
104t
Cheyletiella blakei, 453, 454
in humans, 449
Cheyletiella dermatitis. See Cheyletiellosis.
Cheyletiella mitets), acetate tape impression for, 107
eggs of, 108, 112
examination for, 106, 107
flea comb for, 107
skin scraping for, 101, 106
Cheyletiella parasitivorax, 453, 454
in rabbits, 1448
Cheyletiella yasguri, 453, 454, 455
Cheyletiellosis, 449, 453-457
cause of, 453
diagnosis of, 456, 457
in guinea pigs, 1433
in rabbits, 1447, 1448
pathogenesis of, 453-456
treatment of, 456-457
Cheyletus eruditis, 453
Cheylletiella mite infestation. See Cheyletiellosis.
Chicago disease. See Blastomycosis.
Chief complaint, in diagnosis, 75
Chigger mite(s). See Trombiculosis (chigger mites).
Chihuahua, anal sac disorders in, 1201
atopy in, 581
color dilution alopecia in, 967
follicular dysplasia in, 971
melanocytoma in, 1359
pattern baldness in, 965
pinnal alopecia in, 887
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Chin, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Chinchilla, dermatoses of, 1416-1417
fatty acid deficiency in, 1417
fungal infections of, 1416
fur chewing in, 1417
fur-slip in, 1417
nutritional deficiency in, 1417
zinc deficiency in, 1417
Chinese crested dog, 957, 957
Chinese Shar Pei. See Shar Pei.
Chirodiscoides caviae, in guinea pigs, 1433, 1434
Chitin, 336
synthesis of, inhibitors of, in insect control, 426
Chitosan, 336
Chitosanide, 221
Chlorambucil, for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for pemphigus, 681
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 673
Chlorarninets), in topical therapy, 231
Chloramphenicol, adverse effects and side effects of, 724725
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci,
282
against staphylococcal infection, 283
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282

>

1475

Chloramphenicol (Continued)
for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1227
systemic, dosage of, 284t
CWorhexiDerm, 917, 1035. See also Chlorhexidine, shampoo.
CWorhexiDerm Maxi. See Chlorhexidine, shampoo.
ChlorhexiDerm Maximum. See Chlorhexidine, topical.
Chlorhexidine, 1035
for contaminated wounds, 267
in topical therapy, 230
shampoo, 223, 356t
topical, 356t, 409
for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Chlorhexidine diacetate, preoperative use of, 255
Chlorhexidine/miconazole shampoo, antifungal therapy
with, 409
Chlorinated hydrocarbon(s), antiparasitic therapy with, 424
Chloroacetate esterase, in cell type identification, 204t
Chloroaluminum sulfonated phthalocyanine, 237
Chloroquine, 254, 678
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
Chlorpheniramine, for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Chlorphenolac, for keratin clearance, in fungal diagnosis,
120-121
formula for, 120
Chlorpyrifos, 423, 425
Cholesteatoma, aural, 1216
Cholesterol cleftts), dermal, 160, 161
Cholinesterase inhibitorts), antiparasitic therapy with, 424425
Chondritis. See Auricular chondritis.
Chondroitin-4-sulfate, 38
Chondroitin-6-sulfate, 36t, 38
Chondroma, 1315-1316
Chondrosarcoma, 1315-1316, 1317
Chow Chow, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome in, 847
adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
aspergillosis in, 397
color dilution alopecia in, 967
dermatomyositis in, 940
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
follicular dysplasia in, 890
haircoat of, 8
hypogonadism in, 844-845
hypothyroidism in, 852
melanocytoma in, 1359
mucinosis in, 1174
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686, 687
postclipping alopecia in, 897
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
tyrosinase deficiency in, 1018-1019
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 757
Chromoblastomycosis, definition of, 376
Chromomycosis, 379
definition of, 376
Chromophobets), 781
Chronic radiant heat dermatitis, 897-899
Chronology of veterinary dermatology, 1459-1464
Chrysops spp., 502
Chrysosporium spp., in normal flora, 338, 338t
Chrysotherapy, for pemphigus, 681
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689-690
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 675-676

1476 • Index
Chyle, subcutaneous, 1090
Chymase,39
in cell type identification, 204t
Cicatricial alopecia, 897
Cicatricial pemphigoid. See Pemphigoid, mucous membrane.
Cicatricial pemphigoid antigen, 36t
Cimetidine, for recurrent bacterial infections, 286
Ciprofloxacin, in small animals, dosage and administration
of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1229
pinnal erythema in cats caused by, 1023
Circumanal (perianal) glands, 54-55
tumors of, 1272, 1279-1281,1280,1281
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
Citrinin, noi
Citrobacter spp., otitis media caused by, 1214t
Citronella, 427, 502
Citrulline, 43
Civatte body(ies), 140
Cladophialiophora spp., 379
Cladosporium spp., in normal flora, 338, 338t
Cladosporum bantianum. See Xylohypha bantiana.
Cladosporum trichoules. See Xylohypha bantiana.
Clam digger's itch, 436
Clarithromycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,282
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Clawts), anatomy of, 1190-1193, 1191-1192
clipping of, 210-211
in cats, 215
common and less common dermatoses of, 105t
dennatophyte collection from, 120
diseases of, 1190, 1193-1200
asymmetric versus symmetric, 1194
diagnosis of, 1199-1200
in cats, 1193, 1194t
in dogs, 1193, 1194t
miscellaneous causes of, 1199
terminology for, 1193, 1193t
treatment of, 1200
infections of, 1189, 1195
neoplasia of, 1196-1197, 1198
of guinea pig, overgrowth of, 1439
red/brown, 1022
supranumerary, 1197, 1199
trauma to, 1193-1194
Clear cell(s). See Melanocyte(s).
Cleft(s), artifactual, 148, 149
at dermoepidermal junction, 147-148
cholesterol, dermal, 160, 161
epidermal, 147-148, 148
Client compliance, in skin treatment, 215-217, 216t
Client-veterinarian relationship, 75, 93
Clindamycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,282
for canine neosporosis, 533
otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Clipping, 214. See also Grooming.
alopecia after, 897, 898
before bathing, 223
of claws, 210-211
complications of, 1194
in cats, 215
Clitoral hypertrophy, in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 801,
804,846
Clofazamine, skin color change caused by, 1023

Clomicalm. See Clomipramine.
Clomipramine, 1056-1057
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Clonidine, in diagnosis of GH deficiency, 794-795
Clorox,231
Clostridium spp., as resident flora, in dogs, 34, 275
cellulitis caused by, 310
in infections, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Clostridium welchii, in anal sacs, 1201
Clotrimazole, topical, 356t, 409
Clotrimazole/betamethasone, topical, 356t
Clotrimazole/betamethasone/gentamicin, topical, 356t
Club hair, 48, 49, 50
Cluster differentiation (CD), 543
Coagulation, electrosurgical, 262
Coagulation necrosis, 136
Coal tar solution, 1027
Cocci. See also Staphylococci; Streptococci.
identification of, 116
phagocytosed, 113
Coccidioides immitis, 337, 394, 396
culture of, 121
Coccidioidomycosis, cause of, 394
clinical findings in, 387
clinical management of, 395
diagnosis of, 395, 396
in cats, clinical findings in, 395
in dogs, clinical findings in, 387, 394, 396
in ferrets, 1419
pathogenesis of, 394
Cochliomyia hominovorax, 503
Cocker spaniel. See Spaniel, cocker.
Colchicine, for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 678
Cold agglutinin disease, 717-719
Cold cream, 225
Cold hemagglutinin disease, 717
Collagen, abnormalities of, 37
dermal, 36-38, 37
atrophy of, 159
degeneration of, 157
dysplasia of, 159, 159
dystrophic mineralization of, 157-158, 158
fibrinoid degeneration of, 157
hyalinization of, 156-157
lysis of, 157
pathologic changes in, terminology for, 156-159
disorders of, 978-986
epidermal, 11
functions of, 36, 37
in dermal edema, 163-164
synthesis of, 37
inhibitors of, 37
stimulators of, 37
types of, 36t, 37
in cell type identification, 204t
Collagenase (s), 37
Collagenous nevus/nevi, 1380-1381, 1382-1384,1384,
1385
breedts) with predilection for, 1238t
multiple, 986
renal pathology with, 1383
paraneoplastic, 1375
Collarettets), epidermal, 86, 87, 97, 156
Collie, Bearded, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
benign fibrous histiocytoma in, 1354

Index· 1477
Collie (Continued)
Border, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
bullous pemphigoid in, 695
cutaneous histiocytosis in, 1353
cyclic hematopoiesis in, 977-978, 1014
dermatomyositis in, 938, 940, 942, 944
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
epidermolysis bullosa simplex in, 938
fly bites on, 501, 502
food hypersensitivity in, 618
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in, 1136
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of, 707, 717, 946-947
immunodeficiency in, 279t
ivermectin contraindicated in, 1229
ivermectin sensitivity in, 428-429
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 303
pemphigus erythematosus in, 690, 692
protothecosis in, 405
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1241
superficial bacterial folliculitis in, 294
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
vitiligo in, 1015
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
Colloid bodytles). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Colloid milium, 1178, 1179
Colonic adenocarcinoma, cutaneous metastases of, 1366,
1373, 1374
Color dilution, normal, hair examination in, 108, 110
Color dilution alopecia, 965-970, 1029
cause and pathogenesis of, 967
clinical features of, 967-968
clinical management of, 968-970
diagnosis of, 968, 969, 970
differential diagnosis of, 968
hair examination in, 108, 110
haircoat color and, 76
Combined immunodeficiency, 279t
Comedo, 87, 95
Comedo nevi, 1389, 1391
Comedo syndrome, in miniature Schnauzer. See Schnauzer
comedo syndrome.
Comedone/s), in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 802, 803
Comedone syndrome, ventral, 1103
Common brown spider, 484
Complement, 559
deficiency of, 279t
epidermal, 31
Compliance, client, in skin treatment, 215-217, 216t
Conditioner(s), 211
for hair, 212, 218t
Condyloma, canine. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Conulioholus spp., 384
Conidiogenous cell, definition of, 336
Conidiophore, definition of, 336
Conidium/conidia, definition of, 336
types of, 336-337
Conjunctivitis, canine nictitans plasmaeytic, treatment of,
674
Connective tissue, atrophy of, 197-199
destruction of, 37
Conofite. See Miconazole.

Contact dermatitis, allergic. See Contact hypersensitivity
(allergic contact dermatitis).
diagnosis of, 143, 144, 145
drug-induced, in cats, 721, 723t
in dogs, 721, 722t
in cats, diagnosis of, 154
in ferrets, 1426
in hamsters, 1441
in rabbits, 1450
irritant, 1075, 1081-1083, 1082
Contact hypersensitivity (allergic contact dermatitis), 88,
608-615
afferent phase of, 609
cause and pathogenesis of, 608-611, 612t
clinical features of, 604, 611-615, 612t, 613
clinical management of, 615
diagnosis of, 612-615
ear involvement in, 1210-1211, 1211-1212
efferent (elicitation) phase of, 609
histopathology of, 614-615
Contagious ecthyma, 524
Contagious viral pustular dermatitis, 524
Coonhound, Bluetick, blastomycosis in, 392
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
Treeing Walker, blastomycosis in, 392
Copper, deficiency of, 1020, 1119
in rabbits, 1449
Coral snakets), 1090
Cordylobia spp., 505
Cordylobia anthropophaga, 501, 504, 504
Corgi. See Welsh corgi.
Corium. See Dennis.
Corneocyte(s),27-28
Corneometer, 32
Cornification, 29
defects of, 913-949
Cornifin,28
Corps ronds, 138
Cortex, of hair shaft, 39,41, 44, 108, 110
Corticosteroid(s), antiseborrheic therapy with, 919-920
for dermatomyositis, 945
topical, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Corticotroph(s), 781
Corticotropin. See ACTH.
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), 781
Corticotropin-releasing factor stimulation test, 793
in hyperadrenocorticism, 810
Cortisol, blood levels of, determination of, 790-791
measurement of, in dogs, 808
Cortisol response testis), 791-793
Cortisol/creatinine ratio, urinal)', in cats, 818
in dogs, 808-809
Corynebacterium spp., as transient flora, in dogs, 275
in oral flora of cats, 276
trichomycosis axillaris caused by, 327
Corynebacterium minutissimum, fluorescence of, 119
Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis, in abscesses in cats,
311
Cowpox virus infection, feline. See Feline poxvirus infection.
Cream(s), formulations of, and efficacy of active ingredients, 218t, 224-225
Cream rinse, 212, 918, 1035
Cresol(s), contraindications to, in cats, 230
in topical therapy, 230
Critical temperature, definition of, 53
for dogs, 53
Crotalidae, 1090

1478 • Index
Crustts), 86, 87,94, 154, 154-156,155
cellular, 155
hemorrhagic, 154-155
palisading, 155
serocellular (exudative), 154, 155
serous, 154
Cryofibrinogen(s), 717
Cryofibrinogenemia, 717-719
Cryoglobulin(s), 717
Cryoglobulinemia, 713, 717-719, 718
Cryopathic hemolytic anemia, 717
Cryosurgery, 255-259
advantages of, 256
disadvantages of, 257
for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
freezing agents for, 257
indications for, 258- 259
principles of, 255- 256
units for, 257-258
Cryptococcosis, 395-400
cause of, 395
claw involvement in, 1195
clinical management of, 399-400
diagnosis of, 398, 398-400
in cats, clinical findings in, 397, 398, 399, 400
in dogs, clinical findings in, 395, 397, 398, 399
in guinea pigs, 1431
pathogenesis of, 395
pododermatitis caused by, 305
Cryptococcus neoformans, 337, 388, 395
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
serotypes of, 395
stain for, 119
varieties of, 395
Cryptorchidism, 838, 843
Ctenocephalides canis, 491, 492. See also Fleais).
Ctenocephalides felis felis, 491,491, 492. See also Flea(s).
on ferrets, 1419
on hamsters, 1440
on mice, 1443
on rabbits, 1449
on rats, 1453
Curoularia geniculata, 377
Cushing's disease. See Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's
disease, Cushing's syndrome).
Cutaneous arteriovenous fistula. See Arteriovenous fistula.
Cutaneous asthenia. See Asthenia, cutaneous (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, dermatosparaxis).
Cutaneous bacterial granuloma (botryomycosis, bacterial
pseudomycetoma),302, 311-312,313
in mice, 1442
Cutaneous cystts). See Cyst(s).
Cutaneous drug reaction. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Cutaneous flushing, 1022-1023, 1052
Cutaneous histiocytosis. See Histiocytosis.
Cutaneous hornts), 1244, 1392, 1394-1396,1396-1398
feline leukemia virus and, 517
in dogs, 1241, 1242
multiple, in cats, 528
Cutaneous laxity, idiopathic acquired, 1173
Cutaneous mucinosis, 996-997, 1401, 1402, 1402
Cutaneous neuroendocrine tumorts), primary, 1369-1370,
1370
Cutaneous oncology, 1236-1239
Cutaneous papilloma. See Papilloma(s), cutaneous.
Cutaneous plasmacytoma. See Plasmacytoma.
Cutaneous tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis.

Cutaneous vasculitis. See Vasculitis.
Cuterebra spp., 501, 504
in ferrets, 1419
infestation of, 505
Cuterebra buccata, 1449
Cuterebra cuniculi, 1449
Cuterebra horripilum, 1449
Cuticle, of hair shaft, 39, 41, 108, 110
Cutis laxa, 987
Cutting, electrosurgical method for, 261
without coagulation, 261
Cyclic hematopoiesis, 279t
canine, 977-978, 1014
Cyclic neutropenia, canine, 977-978, 1014
Cyclin(s), 1239
Cycloheximide, fungal sensitivity to, 121
Cyclophosphamide, adverse effects and side effects of, 672,
673
antineoplastic therapy with, 672, 673
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 671-673, 672t
Cyclosporine, adverse effects and side effects of, 244, 723,
1246
antiseborrheic therapy with, 1030
dosage and administration of, 244
drug interactions with, 244
for canine atopy, 244, 601
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for graft -versus-host disease, 720
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1146
for hypersensitivity disorders, 570-571
for immune-mediated disorders, 244, 720
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 674
indications for, 243-244
pharmacology of, 243-244
topical, 674
Cydectin. See Moxidectin.
Cyproheptadine hydrochloride, 811
Cyromazine, 430
Cystis), 87, 92
branchial, 1382
cutaneous, 1375-1382
dermoid, 1378-1379
breedis) with predilection for, 1238t
dermoid (dermoid sinus), 936-937
epidermal inclusion. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
epidermoid. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland, 1366, 1379-1381,
1380-1382
follicular, 1366, 1375-1378,1376, 1377
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
hom (keratin cysts), 156
hybrid, 1378, 1379
infundibular, 1376-1378, 1377, 1378
isthmus-catagen, 1377, 1379
matrical, 1378
pseudohom, 156
sebaceous. See Cyst(s), infundibular.
sebaceous gland, 1381
tricholemmal, 1377, 1379
Cystadenoma, 1276
papillary, 1277
Cystocercoid infection, 440
Cystomatosis, of epitrichial (apocrine) sweat glands, 13801381, 1381
Cythioate, 428, 499
Cytocrinia, 19

Index • 1479
Cytokeratin, 20-22, 22t, 52
in cell type identification, 204t
Cytokinets), 543-545, 546t
Cytologic examination, 112-117
findings in, 113-115,116-117, 118t
specimen collection for, 112-116
stains used in, 116
Cytology, of normal skin, 115, 116
Cytostan A, 28
Cytoxan. See Cyclophosphamide.

Dachshund, acanthosis nigricans in, 975, 976, 1007
alopecia areata in, 761, 762, 764
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
callus dermatitis in, 1102
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186
claw disease in, clinical management of, 1200
color dilution alopecia in, 967
congenital microtia in, 1231, 1232
ear margin dermatosis in, 1044, 1044
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
estrogen-responsive dermatosis of, 829
food hypersensitivity in, 618
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141
haircoat of, 7
histiocytomas in, 1347
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
hyperpigmentation in, 1010
hypogonadism in, 833
hypothyroidism in, 852
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
juvenile cellulitis in, 1165
lipomas in, 1308
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
mast cell tumors in, 1320
panniculitis in, 1158, 1159
pattern baldness in, 963-964, 965
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
pinnal alopecia in, 887, 888, 889
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
seborrhea in, 913, 1032
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
vasculitis in, 744
vitiligo in, 1015
Dalmatian, actinic keratoses in, 1391
atopy in, 581
drug reactions in, 721
food hypersensitivity in, 618
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
pododermatitis in, 305
postbathing folliculitis in, 212
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 76, 78t
solar dermatitis in, 1079
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
Dandie Dinmont terrier, hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
Dandruff, walking. See Cheyletiellosis.
Dapsone, adverse effects and side effects of, 1127
for pemphigus, 682

Dapsone (Continued)
for subcorneal pustular dermatosis, 1127-1128
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 676-677
toxicity of, 676-677
Darier's disease, 138
Dawn dish soap, 213
D- Basic shampoo, 1035
Deafness, after ear flushing, 1224
in cats, 8
Decorin,38
Dectomax. See Doramectin.
Decubital ulceris), 1097, 1103
management of, 267-268
Deep metatarsal/metacarpal tortis. See Focal metatarsal jistulation.
Deer fly, 502
Deer tick(s), 444
Deerhound, Scottish, congenital hypothyroidism in, 852
Defend Exspot Insecticide for Dogs, 498
f3-Defensin(s), 33
Dell(s), epidermal, 156
Deltamethrin, 426, 498
Demodectic mite(s). See Demodicosis.
Demodex aurati, 1439, 1440
Demodex canis, 106,457-458,458-460,474
Demodex cati, 106,474, 474-476,475
in Bowen's disease, 1258, 1260
Demodex caviae, 1434, 1434
Demodex criceti, 474, 475, 1439
Demodex cuniculi, on rabbits, 1449
Demodex gatoi, 106, 474, 474-476, 476
Demodicosis, 277
adult-onset, 278, 461, 467
claw involvement in, 1195
diagnosis of, 185
in cats, 466, 474-475, 474-476
generalized, 466
in dogs, 169, 196, 457-474
adult-onset, 278, 461, 467
and atopy, co-occurrence of, 473
bacterial complications of, 465
cause of, 457-458, 458-460
cellular immunity in, 463-464
clinical features of, 462, 464-465, 466
clinical management of, 469-474
diagnosis of, 465-467
differential diagnosis of, 469
generalized, 459-463, 462, 465, 466, 469-474
histopathology of, 467-469, 467-469
humoral immunity in, 463
localized, 449, 459-460, 462, 464-465, 469
nonspecific immunity in, 463
transmission of, 458
types of, 459-463
in ferrets, 1419
in gerbils, 1428
in guinea pigs, 1433-1434, 1436
in hamsters, 1439-1440, 1440
in hyperadrenocorticism, 803, 803
in rabbits, 1449
in rats, 1453
pododermatitis caused by, 305
skin scraping for, 101-106,467
Demulcent(s), 227
Dendrocytes, dermal, 38, 39
Depigmentation, nasal (Dudley nose), 1016-1017
Depo-Medrol. See Methylprednisolone acetate.

1480 • Index
Depo-Provera. See Medroxyprogesterone acetate; Progesterone, repositol.
L-Deprenyl, for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 811-812
for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
Derm Caps, 239, 929, 945, 1113, 1198
for feline eosinophilic granuloma, 1133
Dennacentor spp., 443, 444
Dermacentor andersoni, 444, 444
Dermacentor occidentalis, 444
Dermacentor oariabilis, 444, 445
Dennacool, 229, 229t
Dermal collagen. See Collagen.
Dermal dysplasia, 936
Dermal hair papilla, 41, 44, 46, 46, 47, 48, 49
Dermal macrofibril bundle (DMB), 35
Dermal Soothe, 229
antipruritic therapy with, 229t
for pruritus, 228
Dennanyssus gallinae, 445-446, 446. See also Mite(s),
poultry.
skin scraping for, 101
DermaPet shampoots), 917, 918, 1026-1027, 1035
Dermatan sulfate, 38
Dermatitis, acral lick. See Acral lick dermatitis.
acute moist, 288, 300. See also Pyotmumatic dermatitis.
allergic contact. See Contact hypersensitivity (allergic
contact dermatitis).
allergic inhalant. See Atopy.
Alternaria, 387, 391, 392
Ancylosto1fUl, 431-432, 432
A~pergillus, 397, 403-404
callus, and pyoderma, 1097, 1102-1103
caterpillar, 507, 507
Cheuletiella. See Cheyletiellosis.
chronic atopic, 99
chronic radiant heat, 897-899
contagious viral pustular, 524
diffuse, 184-189, 185
cell types in, 184-187
characterization of, 187-189
granulomatous, 184, 185
nongranulomatous, 184, 189
feline immunodeficiency virus, 519, 520, 521
feline leukemia virus, 517, 518-519
fibrosing, 196, 202
filarial, 644
fly, 500-502, 501
Geotrichum, 408
granulomatous, 184, 187
interstitial, drug-induced, 725, 727
heartworm, 439
herpes, feline. See Feline rhinotracheitis infection.
hookworm, 431-432, 432, 433
claw involvement in, 1195
in leishmaniasis, 530-531, 534-535, 535
inhalant allergic. See Atopy.
interface. See Interface dermatitis.
interstitial. See Interstitial dermatitis.
intraepidermal vesicopustular, drug-induced, 729, 730
irritant contact, 1075, 1081-1083,1082
localized moist (sore dewlap), in rabbits, 1445
Malassezia. See Malassezia dermatitis.
miliary, 294, 343, 650
differential diagnosis of, 633, 633t
mosquito, 502-503
mucocutaneous, drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
nasal solar. See Nasal solar dermatitis.

Dermatitis (Continued)
nodular, 184-189, 185
cell types in, 184-187
characterization of, 187-189
nongranulomatous, 189
Pelotlera, 432-434, 434-436
in guinea pigs, 1433
in humans, 432
perforating, 1168-1170,1169, 1170
perivascular. See Perivascular dermatitis.
pinnal, 1211
preauricular ulcerative, idiopathic, of cats, 1177
psychogenic, feline, 1060-1061, 1066-1070
cause and pathogenesis of, 1066
clinical features of, 1060-1061, 1067, 1068
clinical management of, 1069-1070
diagnosis of, 1067-1069,1069
pododermatitis caused by, 305
pustular, contagious viral, 524
intraepidermal, 189-190, 192, 193t
subepidermal, 190, 193t
superficial, in kittens, 288
pyogranulomatous, 184, 188, 313, 317
pyotraumatic, 288, 300, 1097, 1104, 1104-1105
rhabditic. See Pelodera dermatitis.
Rhodotorula, 375, 376
Schistosoma, 436
seborrheic, 1030
localized, 1030
skin fold, 288. See also Intertrigo.
solar. See Nasal solar dermatitis; Solar dermatitis.
staphylococcal, in dogs, 205
subepidermal vesicular, drug-induced, 729
traumatic, in hamsters, 1440
Trichosporon, 407-408
Uncinaria, 431-432, 433
vesicopustular, 190
drug-induced, 729, 730
vesicular, intraepidermal, 189-190
subepidermal, 190
Dermatitis medicamentosa. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Dermatobia hominis, 504
Dermatochalasis. See Cutis laxa.
Dermatofibroma, 1283
Dermatofibrosis, nodular, in Gennan shepherd, 13801381, 1382-1383
Dermatohistopathology, confusing terms used in, 176-177
pattern analysis in, 177-202
terminology for, 131
Dermatology, veterinary, chronology of, 1459-1464
Dermatome(s),59
Dermatomycosis, definition of, 336
Dermatomyositis, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
claw involvement in, 1199
diagnosis of, 146
familial canine, 940-946
cause and pathogenesis of, 940
clinical features of, 941-943, 942-943
clinical management of, 945-946
diagnosis of, 943-944, 944-946
differential diagnosis of, 943
in dogs, 169
diagnosis of, 148
paraneoplastic, 1375
Dermatophagoides farinae, 451, 453
Dermatophagoules pteronyssinus, 451, 453
Dennatophilosis, 296-298, 297

Index > 1481
Dermatophilus congolensis, dermatitis caused by. See Dermatophilosis.
Dermatophyte(s), 336
anthropophilic, 339-340, 340t
culture of, 337
examination for, 119-121
direct, 120-121
specimen collection for, 119-120
geophilic, 339-340, 340t
identification of, 122, 123
in normal flora, 338
superficial mycoses caused by, 338-361
zoophilic, 339, 340t
Dermatophyte test medium (DTM), 121-122, 123, 349
Dermatophytic kerion, 343, 344-345, 351
Dermatophytosis, 277, 339-361
cause of, 339-342, 340t
chronic, 358
claw involvement in, 1195
climate and, 339
clinical findings in, 342-347
clinical management of, 353-361
in catteries, 359
in kittens, 360-361
definition of, 336
diagnosis of, 119-121,347-353,350-355
environmental decontamination in, 359-360
hair examination in, 108, 110
histopathology of, 349, 350, 351
hyperthermia for, 238
in cats, clinical findings in, 343-347, 346, 348
histopathology of, 350, 353
incidence of, 339
in cattery, environmental decontamination in, 359-360
management of, 358-361
monitoring response to therapy in, 361
prevention of, 361
treatment of cats in, 359
treatment of kittens only in, 360-361
in dogs, clinical findings in, 342-343, 344-346
in Europe, 343
incidence of, 339
sylvatic, 343
in ferrets, 1418-1419
in guinea pigs, 1430-1431, 1431
in hamsters, 1439
in humans, 347, 348
animal-origin, 347, 348
in mice, 1442-1443
in multiple-cat households, management of, 358-361
in rabbits, 1446
in rats, 1453
inflammatory response to, 341
pathogenesis of, 339-342
pododermatitis caused by, 305
recurrence of, 358
risk factors for, 342
seasonality of, 339
sylvatic, treatment of, 354
systemic therapy for, 356-358, 357t
topical therapy for, 354-356, 356t, 409
transmission of, 339
vaccination against, 358
Dermatopsychosomatics, 1055
Dermatosis/dermatoses, atrophic, 197-199,203
bullous, autoimmune subepidermal, 694-701
canine ear margin, 1039, 1043-1045, 1044, 1045

Dermatosis/dermatoses (Continued)
castration-responsive, 843-845
in male dog, 843
developmental, 197-199
endocrine, 197-199
estrogen-responsive, 796
of female animals, 830, 831-833, 832, 833
exfoliative, 1049. See also Exfoliative dermatitis.
eyelid, 1185-1190, 1186t
Fe LV, 175,175
generic dog food, 1114-1115, 1122, 1122-1123
growth hormone-responsive. See Hyposomatotropism
(pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsive dermatosis).
invisible, 199-201
lichenoid, 1126-1127, 1130-1132,1132
linear preputial, 830
loss of heterozygosity in, 65
mixed reaction patterns in, 199,205
nutritional, 197-199
periocular, 1186t
psychogenic, 1055-1071
canine, 1058-1066
feline, 1066-1071
pustular, linear IgA, canine, 748, 756, 756
pyoderma-like, 328
sex hormone, 827-851
rare forms of, 851
sterile pustular, cytologic diagnosis of, 117
subcorneal pustular, 89, 1125-1128,1126-1128
cytologic diagnOSiS of, 117
testosterone-responsive, 797
of male animals, 830, 837-838, 838
transient acantholytic, 138
vitamin A-responsive, 1008, 1036-1037,1037
dermatohistopathology of, 133, 136
zinc-responsive, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
dermatohistopathology of, 133, 135
Dermatosparaxis. See Asthenia, cutaneous (Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome, dermatosparaxis).
Dermazole. See Miconazole, shampoo.
Dermis, 34, 35, 35-39
age-related changes in, 64-65
cellular elements of, 37, 39, 40
cellular infiltrates in, 177
deep, 36, 38
deposits in, 160, 161
dermatohistopathology of, terminology for, 156-165
development of, 2
fibers of, 36-38
collagenous, 36-38, 37. See also Collagen.
elastin, 36- 38
reticular, 36
functions of, 35-36
ground (interstitial) substance of, 38
ripening of, 2
scrotal, 36
superficial, 36, 37-38
Dermoid cystts). See Cyst(s), dermoid.
Dermolysis, epidermal. See Acantholysis.
Desaturase, 208
Desiccation, electrosurgical, 261-262
Desmin, in cell type identification, 204t
Desmocalmin, 20
Desmocollin/s), 20
Desmoglea, 20
Desmoglein(s), 20

1482 • Index
Desmoplakin(s), 20, 22t
Desmoplasia, dermal, 161
Desmorrhexis, epidermal. See Acantholysis.
Desmosine, 37
Desmosome(s), 19-20, 22t, 23
core glycoproteins of, 20
plaque proteins of, 20, 22t
Detergent(s),231-232
exposure to, 31
Dexamethasone, for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t
injectable, 247t
otic therapy with, 1226
Dexamethasone suppression test, high-dose, 792-793
in hyperadrenocorticism, 810
in cats, 818
low-dose, 792
in hyperadrenocorticism, 809-810
Diabetes mellitus, 868, 870
and hyperadrenocorticism, in cats, 816
Diagnosis, histopathologic pattern in, 177-202
history-taking in, 71, 72-84, 74
medical history in, 82- 84
methods used in, 71-205
physical examination in, 84-94
record-keeping in, 71-72, 73, 74
systematic approach to, 71, 72t
Diagnostic plan, development of, 93-94
Diamanus montanus, plague transmission by, 325
Diapedesis, of erythrocytes, in epidermis, 147
Diascopy, 88, 91, 100
Diazepam, 1057
adverse effects and side effects of, in cats, 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061-1063
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Diet, and pemphigus, 680, 682
and skin, 207-210
assessment of, 84
for ferrets, 1426
for xanthomatosis, 874
hypoallergenic, for dogs, 623-624
in fatty acid deficiency, 1113
limited-protein, for cats, 627
Diethylcarbamazine, adverse effects and side effects of,
721, 725, 726
Diethylstilbestrol, for feline acquired symmetric alopecia,
902
Diethyltoluamide (DEET), 427
Diff Quik. See Wright's stain, modified (Dif{ Quik).
Differential diagnosis, 93
Differin. See Adapalene.
Diffuse dermatitis. See Dermatitis, diffuse.
Diffuse lipomatosis, idiopathic, 1173, 1173-1175
Difloxacin, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Diflucan. See Fluconazole.
Dihomo y-linolenic acid (DGLA), 208, 239
5,6-Dihydroxyindole (DHl), 17
5,6-Dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid (DHlCA), 17
Diiodothyronine, 782- 783
Dilated pore of Winer, 1254, 1265-1267, 1266, 1267
Dimethyl phthalate, 427
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 219
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
topical therapy with, 235-236
Dtpts), antifungal, 356, 356t
for feline scabies, 484
for scabies, 482
lindane, 424

Dipeptidyl peptidase II, in cell type identification, 204t
Diphenhydramine, in shampoo, 223
Diptera, 500-507
Dipylidium caninum, 493
Direct srnearts), for Malassezia spp., 368
technique for, 112, 113, 117
Dirofilaria immitis, 439
Dirofilaria repens, 439
Dirofilariasis, 439, 643-644, 644, 645
Disinfectantts), 223, 230
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 1089
claw involvement in, 1199
Dissitimurus exudrus, 379
Distemper, canine, 518, 522-524, 523
Distichiasis, 1188
DMSO. See Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
Doberman pinscher, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
antithyroglobulin antibodyties) in, 852
antithyroid antibodyiies) in, 789
benign familial pemphigus in, 947, 948
blastomycosis in, 392
bullous pemphigoid in, 695
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
callus dermatitis in, 1102
coccidioidomycosis in, 394
color dilution alopecia in, 967-968
demodicosis in, 461, 462
dermal melanocytes of, 39
dilution alopecia in, 76
drug reactions in, 721, 723
drug-induced dermatosis in, 1052
drug-related hypopigmentation in, 1020
fibromas in, 1282
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
fibrovascular papillomas in, 1284
flank sucking in, 1060-1061, 1065
follicular dysplasia in, 971
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypopigmentation in, 975, 1008-1009
hypothyroidism in, 852
ichthyosis in, 924
immunodeficiency in, 279t
lichenoid dermatosis in, 1131
lipomas in, 1308
melanocytic neoplasms in, 1359
melanocytoma in, 1359
miniature, color dilution alopecia in, 967
follicular dysplasia in, 971
haircoat of, 7
mucinosis in, 1402
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1018
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
myxomas and myxosarcomas in, 1290
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686, 687
postbathing folliculitis in, 212
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 78t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
seborrhea in, 227, 913, 915, 1032
vitiligo in, 1015
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Dog(s). See also individual species.
bacterial pyoderma in, 28
bathing of, 212-213

Index' 1483
Dog(s) (Continued)
breeds of, alopecic, 957,957-958,958
with predilection for skin disorders, 75, 77t-82t
critical temperature for, 53
cutaneous mast cells of, 39, 40
dermal dendrocytes in, 38
epidermis of, 10
immunoglobulins of, 31
turnover time for, 31
footpad of, 12
hair follicles of, 10
hair growth in, annual, 4
daily, 6
hair types in, 7-8
haircoat of, 7-8
hunting (dolichocephalic) breeds of, nasal folliculitis and
furunculosis in, 303
Langerhans' cells of, 24
normal microflora of. See Microfiora.
resident microflora of, 33-34
respiratory rate of, in thermoregulation, 54
skin of, hydration of, 32
normal pH of, 3
thickness of, 3
stratum corneum in, thickness of, 28
sweating in, 53
tail gland of, 54-55
wild, haircoat of, 7
Dog food, fat in, 1112
generic, dermatosis caused by, 1114-1115, 1122, 11221123
storage of, 209
Dogiel's end-bulb. See Meissner's corpuscle.
Dogue de Bordeaux, footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 78t
Domeboro, 227, 229t, 230
Dopachrome, 17
Dopachrome tautomerase, 17
Dopaquinone, 17
Doramectin, 428, 429
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 430
Dot blot hybridization, 1239
Down hairts), 4
Doxepin, 1056-1057
Doxycycline, efficacy of, against staphylococcal infection,
283
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Dracunculiasis, 435, 437-439, 438
in ferrets, 1419
Dracunculus insignis, 437
Dracunculus medinensis, 437
Drechslera spiciferum. See Bipolaris spiciferum.
Droncit. See Praziquantel.
Drug(s), absorption of, 218-220
diffusion coefficient of, 219
physiologic response to, 1052, 1052-1053
psychotropic, 1056-1057
skin color changes caused by, 1023
Drug allergy. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Drug eruption. See Drug reaction, cutaneous.
Drug reaction, cutaneous, 720- 729
cause and pathogenesis of, 720-721, 722t-723t
claw involvement in, 1199
clinical features of, 721-725, 722t-723t, 724-725, 726
clinical management of, 729

Drug reaction (Continued)
diagnosis of, 725-729, 728t, 729-731
in cats, 721, 723t
in dogs, 197, 721, 722t-723t
predictable versus unpredictable (idiosyncratic), 720
Drug-receptor interaction, 219
Dry bathts), 213, 215
Dry skin, 220
Dudley nose, 1016-1017
Dunstan's blue line, 175-176, 177
Durakyl, 427
Duratrol, 423
Dwarfism, pituitary, 817, 819-822, 820
Dyshesion, epidermal. See Acantholysis.
Dyskeratosis, 137-138, 1025
Dysplasia, dermal, 936
epidermal, 173, 173
canine, 914-915
in West Highland white terrier, 914, 928-929, 930933
follicular, 6,6, 152,153, 166-168
of dermal collagen, 159, 159
of sebaceous glands, 168-170
Dystrophic mineralization, of dermal collagen, 157-158,
158

Ear(s). See also Otitis externa.
anatomy of, 1203, 1203-1204, 1205
cleaning of, 918, 1205, 1221-1225, 1222t
in cats, 215
common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
examination of, 211
external, diseases of, 1203-1232
fold dermatitis of, 1216
glandular disorders of, 1212
hair removal from, 1207
microanatomy of, 1215
middle, 1204
flushing of, 1216, 1217
neoplasia of, 1208
normal flora of, 1214t
parasites in, 1206t, 1209-1211
physiology of, 1203-1204
progressive pathologic changes in, 1205, 1210, 12151216
Ear canalts), cleaning of, 1221-1225, 1222t
drying agents for, 1222t, 1224-1225
flushing of, 1224
mineralized, 1211, 1218
Ear canker, in rabbits, 1448
Ear cleanserts), 1222t
Ear margin dermatosis, canine, 1038, 1043-1045, 1044,
1045
Ear mitefs) (Otodectes cynotis), 449, 450-452, 451, 452,
1205, 1209
examination for, 107
in cats, 435
in dogs, 435
in ferrets, 1419
skin scraping for, 101
Ecchymosis, 87, 88
Eccrine sweat gland(s). See Sweat gland(s), atrichial (eccrine).
Echidnophaga gallinacea, 488-489, 491, 492
Ecthyma, contagious, 524
Ectodex Dog Wash, 470
on ferrets, 1419, 1420

1484 • Index
Ectoparasites (Continued)
on gerbils, 1428
on guinea pigs, 1420, 1431-1434,1432, 1434, 1436
on hamsters, 1439-1440, 1440
on mice, 1432, 1435, 1443
on rabbits, 1434, 1447, 1448-1449
on rats, 1447, 1453
Ectothrix infection, 341
diagnosis of, 121
Ectromelia, infectious, in mice, 1443
Ectropion, 1186
Edema. See also Eosinophilic dermatitis and edema.
dermal, 163-164, 164
intercellular, of epidermis, 140-142, 143
intracellular, of epidermis, 142, 144
EDTA- Tris, potentiation of topical antibiotics with, 280
EFA Caps, 1113
Efa Vet, 1113
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. See Asthenia, cutaneous (EhlersDanlos syndrome, dermatosparaxis).
Ehrlichia canis, 444, 529-531
Ehrlichiosis, canine, 529-531
Eicosanoidls), 30, 559-560, 56lt
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 208, 239-240
Eimer's organ. See Tylotrich pad.
Elafin,28
Elapidae, 1090
Elastin, dermal, 36-38
atrophy of, 159
disorders of, 987
epidermal, 11
Elastolysis. See Cutis laxa.
Elaunin fiberts), 38
Elavil. See Amitriptyline.
Electric fulguration, 262
Electrocoagulation, 262
Electrodesiccation, 261-262
Electroincision, 261
Electrolysis, 262
Electron microscopy, 202
of pemphigus lesions, 681
Electroshock, for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
Electrosurgery, 259-262
instrumentation for, 261
mechanisms of, 261
techniques of, 261-262
Eleidin,27
Elkhound, Norwegian, hair color of, 8
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Elongase, 208
Emollientts), 223, 228, 1028
in topical therapy, 218t, 227
Emphysema, subcutaneous, 1090
Emulsionts), therapeutic, 224-225
Endectocide(s), systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 428430
Endocrine disease, 992-995
causes of, 781
clinical aspects of, 798
diagnosis of, 198, 782
in ferrets, 1421-1426
Endorphints), endogenous, 1057
Endorphin blockers, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Endorphin substitution, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Endothelial cell(s), immunologic functions of, 556

Endothelium, vascular, 56
cutaneous nerves and, 59
Endothrix infection, 341
diagnosis of, 121
English bulldog. See Bulldog, English.
English pointer. See Pointer, English.
English setter. See Setter, English.
English Springer spaniel. See Spaniel, Springer.
Enilconazole powder, 224
Enilconazole rinse, 356, 356t
antifungal therapy with, 410
Enrofloxacin, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1227, 1229
pinnal erythema in cats caused by, 1023
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Entactin. See Nidogen.
Enterococcus spp., otitis media caused by, 1214t
Enterotoxints), 275
Entomophthorales, 384
Entomophthoromycosis, 377, 384
Entropion, 1186
Environmental skin disease, 1073-1108
Enzymeis), epidermal, hydrolytic, 34
oxidative, 34
Enzyme histochemistry, 202, 204t
Eosinophtlis), cutaneous, 39
functions of, 557-558
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 117, 118t
in dermal blood vessels, of cats, 182, 183
in dermatitis, 188
secretory products of, 557-558, 558t
Eosinophilia, in cats, 178
with furunculosis, 299-300
Eosinophilic dermatitis and edema, in dogs, 1155-1156
Eosinophilic furunculosis, of face, canine, 505, 637, 638,
641-642, 642. 643
Eosinophilic granuloma, canine, 1150-1151, 1153-1155,
1155-1156
feline, 1150-1151, 1152-1153,1153-1154
EOSinophilic granuloma complex, feline, 1148-1153
Eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions, 188-189
Eosinophilic otitis extema, proliferative, canine, 1213
EOSinophilic pinnal folliculitis, sterile, canine, 1210-1211,
1213
EOSinophilic plaque, feline, 1142, 1149-1152,1150-1152
Eosinophilic pustulosis, canine, sterile, 1132-1133, 11341136
Eosinophilic ulcer. See Indolent ulcer, feline.
EOSinophilic vasculitis, 182
Epicuticle, of hair shaft, 41
Epidermal collaretteis), 86, 87, 97, 156
Epidermal dysplasia, canine, 914-915
in West Highland white terrier, 914, 928-929, 930933
Epidermal melanin unit, 16
Epidermal necrolysis, toxic. See Toxic epidermal necrolusts.
Epidermal nevus/nevi, 1007, 1013,1380-1381, 1388-1389,
1388-1389
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
in dogs, 157
Epidermal-dermal junction, 34, 35
Epidermis, age-related changes in, 64-65
basal layer (stratum basale) of, 10, 13, 13-14, 15, 20
basement membrane zone of, 11, 13
components of, 34-35, 36t

Index • 1485
Epidermis (Continued)
functions of, 34
thickened, 172, 172
ultrastructure of, 34-35, 35
clear layer (stratum lucidum) of, 10, 27, 27
dermatohistopathology of, terminology for, 132-156
differentiation of, 29
dysplasia of, 173, 173
enzymes of, 34
granular layer (stratum granulosum) of, 10, 26, 26-27
histochemistry of, 34
horny layer (stratum corneum) of, 10,26,27-29
barrier function of, 31
hydration of, 32
thickness of, 28, 32
keratinization of, 29
microscopic anatomy and physiology of, 10-14, 10-35,
26
prickle cell layer of, 26
proliferation of, 29
spinous layer (stratum spinosum) of, 10, 19-22,
22
stratum conjunctum of, 27
stratum dysjunctum of, 28
thickness of, 10
turnover time for, in dogs, 31
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis, 1012
Epidermolysis bullosa, 938-940
causes of, 13
claw involvement in, 1199
dystrophic (dermatolytic), 938, 938t, 939-940, 941
junctional, 938t, 938-939, 939, 940
types of, 938, 938t
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, 694, 700, 700- 701, 701,
938,940
diagnosis of, 671
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita antigen, 36t
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, 938, 938t
Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, 156, 157
Epidermophytes, 349
Epidermophyton spp., 336
Epidermophyton floccosum, characteristics of, 349
Eptdermopoiesis, 29-31
changes in, 132
defects in, 1025
Epi-Otic, 1223
Epiphora, 1188, 1189
Epi-Soothe, 229t, 236, 917, 1035
Epithelial neoplasrnis), 1239-1281. See also specific neoplasm.
Epitheliogenesis imperfecta. See Aplasia cutis.
Epitheliornals), intracutaneous comifying, See Keratoacanthoma.
sebaceous, in dogs, 1271
Epitope spreading, 667
Ergotism, 1089, 1101
claw involvement in, 1199
in guinea pigs, 1437
Erosionts), 87, 98
Erythema ab igne, 897-899
Erythema annulare centrifugum, in ferrets, 1426, 1427
Erythema multiforme, 729-740
cause and pathogenesis of, 729- 734, 734t
classification of, 732- 733, 733t
clinical features of, 734-737, 735-737
clinical management of, 739- 740
definition of, 729
diagnosis of, 141, 737-739, 738-739

Erythema multiforme (Continued)
drug-induced, in cats, 721, 723t, 724-725, 734, 737, 737
in dogs, 722t, 724-725, 734, 734t
ear involvement in, 1210-1211, 1212
exfoliative, in cats, 525
idiopathic, in dogs, 734, 736, 737, 740
in humans, 732- 733
major, 88, 732
minor, 732, 735
target lesion in, 733- 734, 735, 736
Erythrocyte(s), diapedesis of, in epidermis, 147
Erythroderma, drug-induced, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
Erythromycin, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Escherichia coli, as transient flora, in cats, 275
in dogs, 275
in anal sacs, 1201
otitis media caused by, 1214t
Estradiol, for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
Estrogen(s), 795-796. See also Hyperestrogenism.
and hair growth, 6
blood levels of, assays for, 796
Ethohexadiol, 427
Ethyl alcohol, 230
Ethyl lactate, in shampoo, 223
topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Etretinate, 241-242, 1029
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers,
929
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1146
indications for, 243
otic therapy with, 1229-1230
teratogenicity of, 243, 1029
toxicity of, 243, 1029
Eumelanin(s),8, 16, 17
European blastomycosis. See Cryptococcosis.
Eutrombicula alfreddugesi, 447,447-448. See also Trombiculosis (chigger mites).
Evaporimeter, 32
Excoriation(s), 87, 98
Exfoliative dermatitis, 1049
and thymoma, in cats, 905
drug-induced, 1052, 1052-1053
in cats, 723t
in dogs, 721, 722t
paraneoplastic, 1375
Exocytosis, in epidermis, 147, 148
Exophiala jeanselmei, 379
Exophiala spinifera, 379
Extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), in systemic lupus erythematosus, 706-707
Eyelid(s), anatomy of, 1185
common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
diseases of, 1185-1190, 1186t
diseases that affect other areas and, 1186, 1188t
normal flora of, 1185
tumors of, 1188-1190, 1189, 1190t
Ezrin,20

Facial eczema, in rabbits, 1451
Facial excoriations, self-inflicted, in ferrets, 1427
Facial fold intertrigo, 1097, 1107
Factor VIII - related antigen, in cell type identification, 204t

1486 • Index
Familial vasculopathy, 987-989
Fat(s), dietary, 207-208, 1112
supplementation of, 1113
subcutaneous, changes in, 171-172
necrosis of, 172, 172
Fat cellts). See Lipocyte(s).
Fatty acid(s), and haircoat quality, 209
antibacterial properties of, 274
anti-inflammatory properties of, 208
deficiency of, 1112-1115,1114-1115
in chinchilla, 1417
in guinea pigs, 1434
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1453-1454
dietary, 239-240
essential, 208
deficiency of: 31
for hypersensitivity disorders, 564-566
metabolism of, 208-209, 239-240, 240
of sebum, 51
omega-3, 208
omega-6, 208
omega-3/omega-6, 239, 1113, 1198
antiseborrheic therapy with, 918-919
dietary ratio of, 239
for dermatomyositis, 945
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for feline eosinophilic granuloma, 1133
polyunsaturated, 30, 208, 1113
supplementation of, 208, 209, 239-241
adverse effects and side effects of, 241
for claw disease, 1200
systemic therapy with, 239-241
therapy with, for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland
white terriers, 929
topical therapy with, 235, 1113-1114
Felicola subrostrata, 487, 489, 490
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection, 278, .517-5] 9,
520,521
and abscesses, 311, 517
and fungal infections, 337, 338, 342
and griseofulvin side effects, 357
and Malassezia infection, 363
and mural folliculitis, 907
Feline infectious anemia, 531
Feline infectious peritonitis, 522, 522
Feline leprosy. See Leprosy, feline.
Feline leukemia virus infection, 517, 518-520, 1285-1287
and abscesses, 311, 517
and fungal infections, 337, 338, 342, 519
and Malassezia infection, 363
neoplasia related to, 517, 528
Feline poxvirus infection, 145, 518-519, 520-522
Feline rhinotracheitis infection, 518, 524-525, 526-529
Feline sarcoma virus, 528, 1285-1287
FeLV. See Feline leukemia virus infection.
Feminization, of male dog, 796, 840-843
idiopathic, 851
Fenoxycarb, 426, 495
Fenthion, 428, 499
Fenvalerate, 426
Ferret, actinomycosis in, 1417
alopecia in, breeding season and, 1425
hyperestrogenism and, 1424-1425, 1425
testicular neoplasia and, 1425
atopy in, 1426, 1427
bacterial infections in, 1417, 1418

Ferret (Continued)
biotin deficiency in, 1426
blastomycosis in, 1419
blue ferret syndrome in, 1426-1427
burrowing in, 1427
coccidioidomycosis in, 1419
contact dermatitis in, 1426
demodicosis in, 1419
dermatoses of, 1417-1428
diet for, 1426
dracunculiasis in, 1419
ear mites in, 1419
ectoparasites on, 1419, 1420
endocrine disorders in, 1421-1426
erythema annulare centrifugum in, 1426, 1427
fleas in, 1419
flystrike in, ]419
fungal infections in, 1418-1419
histoplasmosis in, 1419
hyperadrenocorticism in, 1421-1424, 1422, 1423
hyperestrogenism in, 1424-1425, 1425
hypothyroidism in, 1426
injection reaction in, 1426
intestinal parasites in, 1426
neoplasia in, 1420, 1427-1428
otitis extema in, 1419
otodectic mange in, 1419
pinnal necrosis in, 1419
sarcoptic mange in, 1419
shedding in, 1425
telogen deluxion in, 1425, 1426
ticks in, 1419
viral infections in, 1421, 1421
Festoonls), dermal, 162
Fibril-associated collagens with interrupted triple helices
(FACIT),37
FibriIlin, 36t, 37
Fibrinogen, in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Ftbrohlastts), collagenases synthesized by, 37
dermal, 37, 39
components synthesized by, 36
Fibroblastoma, perineural. See Schwannoma.
Fibroma(s), 1013, 1282, 1282-1283, 1283
breedis) with predilection for, 1237t
in rats, 1455
Shope, in rabbits, 1451-1452
Fibroma durum, 1282
Fibroma molle, 1282
Fibronectints), 36t
functions of, 38
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
synthesis of, 38
FibropapiIloma, diagnosis of, 1245, 1245
Fibroplasia, dermal, 161, 162
Fibropruritic nodule, 1284-1285, 1286, 1287
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
Fibrosarcoma(s), 1281, 1285-1289
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1285-1287
claw involvement in, 1198
clinical findings in, 1287-1288
clinical management of, 1288-1289
cutaneous, in cats, 528
diagnosis of, 1288, 1291
in cats, 1286, 1287-1288
in dogs, 1286, 1287, 1290
in gerbils, 1430
in hamsters, 1442

Index • 1487
Fibrosarcoma(s) (Continued)
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1455
Fibrosis, 196
dermal, 161
perifollicular, 168, 169, 195
Fibrovascular papillomats), 1284, 1284, 1285
Fila brasiliero, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
Filaggrin, 42
functions of, 26
synthesis of, 29
Filamentous body(ies). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Filariasis, 643-644
Filarioidea dermatitis, 644
Fine-needle aspiration, for cytologic diagnOSiS, 115-116
Finnish spitz, pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
Fipronil, 423, 497-498, 500
antiparasitic therapy with, 425
spray, otic therapy with, 1229
Fire antis), sting of, 506, 506-507
Fish scale disease. See Ichthyosis.
Fissurets), 87, 99
Fistula/fistulae, arteriovenous, 1095-1096
multiple perianal, cryosurgery for, 258-259
Fite's modified acid-fast stain, staining characteristics of
various substances with, 130t
FIV. See Feline immunodeficiency virus infection.
Fixed drug eruption, causes of, 721, 722t
in cats, 723t
in dogs, 725, 726
Flame figure(s), 159, 160
Flame follicle(s), 166, 167, 784, 790
Flank sucking, 1060-1061, 1065
Fleats), characteristics of, 490-491, 491
control of, 493-500
in external environment, 494
in internal environment, 494-496
liquid products for, 499-500
on animal, 496-500
spot application products for, 497-498
systemic products for, 499
development of, inhibitors of, 430
European rabbit, on cats, 488-489
growth of, regulators of, 495
life cycle of, 488-489, 491-492
on animals, control of, 496-500
spot application products for, 497-498
on ferrets, 1419
on hamsters, 1440
on humans, 493, 493
on rabbits, 1449
on rats, 1453
plague transmission by, ,325-326
rabbit, 491, 492
common Eastern, 1449
giant Eastern, 1449
repellents for, 499-500
sticktight, 488-489
Flea bite hypersensitivity, and fibropruritic nodule, 12841285
canine, 627-632
allergy testing in, 630-631
cause and pathogenesis of, 627-629
clinical features of, 629
clinical management of, 631-632
diagnosis of, 629-631
histopathology of, 623, 631
clinical management of, 239

Flea bite hypersensitivity (Continued)
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
feline, 632-635
cause and pathogenesis of, 632
clinical features of, 620, 623t, 632- 633
clinical management of, 634-635
diagnosis of, 633t, 633-634, 634
histopathology of, 634
in cats, 157
Flea collarts), 498
Flea comb, for ectoparasite diagnosis, 107
in flea control, 496-497
Flea cream rinses, 498-499
Flea foamis), 500
Flea powderts), 499
Flea shampoots), 498-499
Flea sprayis), 499-500
Flea-bite hypersensitivity, 488-489
Flesh flies, 503
Flora. See Microflora.
Flotation, for ectoparasite diagnosis, 107
Fluconazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 411
antifungal therapy with, 411, 413
dosage and administration of, 357t
Flucort. See Flumethasone.
Flucytosine, adverse effects and side effects of, 415
antifungal therapy with, 414-415
resistance to, 415
Flumethasone, injectable, 247t
Flunixin meglumine, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Fluocinolone, adverse effects and side effects of, 232
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
in shampoo, 223
otic therapy with, 1226
Fluocinonide, adrenocortical suppression by, 232
5-Fluorocytosine, adverse effects and side effects of, 721
Fluoroquinolone(s), anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties of, 285
efficacy of, against staphylococcal infection, 283
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
long-term therapy with, 287
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Fluoxetine, 1056-1057
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Flushing, cutaneous, 1022-1023, 1052
Fly(ies), 500-507
stable, 500, 501
Fly biters), pinnal, 1210-1211, 1211
Fly dermatitis, 500-502, 501
Flystrike, in ferrets, 1419
in rabbits, 1449
Foam cellts), 184-185
epithelioid, 185
Focal adhesiorus). 19, 22t
Focal adnexal dysplasia(s), 1384-1386, 1385
Focal metatarsal fistulation, 980, 985-986, 986
Fogger(s), for flea control, 495-496
Fogo selvagem. See Pemphigus foliaceus.
Fold dermatitis, 1216
Folinic acid, supplementation of, in canine neosporosis,
533
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 781, 795, 798
Follicular arrest, 7, 897, 898
Follicular atrophy, 6
Follicular castts), 87, 95
Follicular dysplasia, 6, 970-973, 1029
black hair, 954, 959-965, 963

1488 • Index
Follicular dysplasia (Continued)
canine, 890
cyclic, 890-893
diagnosis of, 971, 973, 974
feline, 905
treatment of, 971-972
Follicular flushing, 1026
Follicular lipidosis, 973-974
of Rottweilers, 899, 899, 900
Follicular mucinosis. See Alopecia mucinosa.
Follicular parakeratosis, 925-927, 926, 927, 928, 929
Follicular stile, 48
Folliculitis, bacterial, in cats, 300, 302
in hypothyroidism, 853
superficial, 289, 291-296,294, 295, 296
in cats, 294
deep, 299-300
eosinophilic, in cats, 194
facial eosinophilic, in dogs, 505
luminal, 166, 194, 200
mural, 166, 192
granulomatous, drug-induced, 722t, 725, 727, 729,
731
idiopathic lymphocytic, of cats, 907-909, 907-910
infiltrative, 194, 197
interface, 192-194, 196
necrotizing, 194, 198
pustular, 194, 199
muzzle, 303-304
nasal, 301, 303
necrotizing, 301, 303
nonpruritic, 293
pedal. See Pododermatitis.
penetrating. See Furunculosis.
postbathing, 212
pruritic, 293
pyotraumatic, 288, 300-303, 301, 303
staphylococcal, 97
diagnosis of, 113, 150
in cats, 289
in dogs, 170, 171, 347
dermal edema in, 164
superficial, in dogs, 289
superficial, in dogs, 289
Follitropin. See Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).
Fontana's ammoniacal silver nitrate, staining characteristics
of various suhstances with, 130t
Food allergy. See Food hypersensitivity.
Food hypersensitivity, canine, 615-624
cause and pathogenesis of, 615-618, 618t
clinical features of, 604, 618-619, 620
clinical management of, 623-624
diagnosis of, 619-623
histopathology of, 623, 623
clinical features of, 573
diagnosis of, 117, 148
ear involvement in, 1211
feline, 183, 624-627
cause and pathogenesis of, 624-625, 625t
clinical features of, 620, 625
clinical management of, 627
diagnosis of, 626-627
histopathology of, 626-627
mural folliculitis caused by, 909, 910
otitis extema in, 1211, 1213
vasculitis caused by, 743, 745, 747
Food intolerance. See Food hypersensitivity.

Foot licking, 1060, 1066
Footpad(s), anatomy of, 9
atrichial sweating from, 53
dermatophyte collection from, 120
fissures of, 99
histology of, 10, 12
hyperkeratosis of, 930, 935, 935-936, 1114-1115
in canine distemper, 523, 523
in vasculitis, 746, 747
sweat glands of, 52, 52-53
ulceration of, in dog with systemic lupus erythematosus,
696-697
Foreign bodyues), in ear, 1212
skin lesions caused by, 1091-1094, 1093-1095
Foreign body granuloma(s), in hamsters, 1441
Foreign-body reaction(s), cytologic diagnosis of, 117
Formalin, biopsy specimen fixation in, 129
Formamidine(s), topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Fox terrier. See Tenier, fox.
Foxtail, skin lesions caused by, 1091
Francisella tularensis, 444
Freezing artifact, 142, 144
French bulldog. See Bulldog, French.
Frontline. See Fipronil.
Frostbite, 1086, 1088-1089
in rabbits, 1447, 1450
Fulguration, electric, 262
Fulvicin UIF. See Griseofulvin, microsized.
Fungal infection(s). See also Mycosis/mycoses.
diagnosis of, 118t, 118-125
in chinchilla, 1416
in ferrets, 1418-1419
in guinea pigs, 1430-1431,1431
in mice, 1442-1443
in rabbits, 1446, 1447
in rats, 1453
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
pododermatitis caused by, 305
therapy for, 409-415
Fungizone. See Amphotericin B.
Fungus/fungi. See also Microflora; Mycosis/mycoses; specific fungus.
characteristics of, 336-337
classification of, 336
colonies of, morphology of, 123
conidia of. See Conidium/conidia.
contaminant, and pathogenic, differentiation of, 337
culture of, 118, 121-122,123, 337,349
dimorphic, 337
examination for, 118-125
growth of, in tissue, 337
hypersensitivity to, 650
hypha/hyphae of. See Hypha/hyphae.
identification of, 122-125, 123-124, 336
in normal flora, 338, 338t
in cats, 338, 338t
in dogs, 338, 338t
pathogenic, and contaminant, differentiation of, 337
characterization of, 337-338
propagule of, 336
saprophytic, as resident flora, in dogs, 34
in normal flora, 338, 338t
taxonomy of, 337
Fur chewing, in chinchilla, 1417
Fur-slip, in chinchilla, 1417
Furunculosis, 166, 195, 200

Index • 1489
Furunculosis (Continued)
acral lick, 302, 308-309
bacterial, in hypothyroidism, 853
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
deep folliculitis and, 299, 299-300, 301, 302
eosinophilic, of face, canine, 505, 637, 638, 641-642,
642,643
in cats, 300, 302
in dermatophytosis, in dogs, 343, 344
in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 802
in mice, 1442
in rats, 1452
muzzle, 302, 303-304
nasal, 301, 303
pedal. See Pododennatitis.
pyogranulomatous, 351
in dogs, 302
pyotraumatic folliculitis and, 300-303
staphylococcal, 200, 202
in dogs, 171, 299
Fusidic acid, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Fusobacterium spp., cellulitis caused by, 310
in infections, 276
in oral flora of cats, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Fusobacterium necrophorum, in rabbits, 1445

Gap junctions, 19
Celts), 218t, 226
Gelatin, for claw disease, 1200
Gelatinase, 37
Gene(s), homeobox, 93
Gene therapy, 264
Generic dog food dermatosis, 1114-1115, 1122, 11221123
Gentamicin, in small animals, dosage and administration of,
1418t
otic therapy with, 1227
topical, for bacterial infection, 280
Geotrichium candidum, 408
Geotrichium dermatitis, 408
Geotrichosis, claw involvement in, 1195
Gerbil, bacterial infections in, 1428
bald nose in, 1429
barbering in, 1429
congenital abnormalities of pigmentation and haircoat in,
1429
demodicosis in, 1428
dermatoses of, 1428-1430
ectoparasites on, 1428
neoplasia in, 1429-1430
sore nose in, 1429, 1430
tail disorder of, 1429
ventral scent gland disorder of, 1429
German shepherd. See Shepherd, Gennan.
German shorthaired pointer. See Pointer, Gennan shorthaired.
Germicide(s), 230
Giant cellis), in feline herpes dermatitis, 525, 527
multinucleate epidermal, 174-175, 175
multinucleate histiocytic, 147, 185-187, 186
multinucleate keratinocyte, 174-175, 175
Gilchrist's disease. See Blastomycosis.
Clandts), age-related changes in, 64-65
changes in, terminology for, 168-171
sebaceous. See Sebaceous glandes).

Gland(s) (Continued)
specialized, 54-55
sweat. See Sweat glandes).
Cliricola porcelli, in guinea pigs, 1433, 1434
Glomus, 57, 58
Glossitis, burdock, 1091, 1092
Glucan,336
Clucocorticoid/s), adverse effects and side effects of, 246
alternate-day therapy with, 250, 251
and adrenocortical function in dogs, 232, 234t
and skin, 789- 790
anti-inflammatory properties of, 244-245, 245t
injectable, 246-247, 247t, 250
intravenous, 247
oral, 245, 250
otic preparations of, 1225t, 1226t
parenteral, 245-246
production of, 789
selection of, 247-248
urinary levels of, determination of, 790
Glucocorticoid therapy. See also Hyperadrenocorticism
(Cushing's disease, Cushing's syndrome).
effects of, on biopsy, 128-129
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for graft -versus-host disease, 720
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma,
1138-1139
for pemphigus, 681
for pemphigus erythematosus, 693
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689-690
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive, 671, 672t
intralesional, 247, 250, 252
pulse, 671
systemic, 238-239, 244-252
administration of, 246-247, 247t
adverse effects and side effects of, 250- 252
dosage of, 248-249, 249t
evaluation of, 252
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
for hypersensitivity disorders, 570
indications for, 246
otic therapy with, 1229
regimen for, 249-250
topical, adverse effects and side effects of, 232
alopecia caused by, 889, 896-897
anti-inflammatory effects of, 232
anti-inflammatory potencies of, 232, 233, 233t
for ear treatment, 1225t, 1226t
reactions to, in cats, 902, 903
in dogs, 896, 896
J3-Glucuronidase, in cell type identification, 204t
Glycerin, 1028
Glycosaminoglycan(s),38
Glypican, 38
Gnathostoma, definition of, 440
Gnathostoma spinigerum, in dogs, 440
in humans, 432
Gold. See Chrysotherapy.
Golden retriever. See Retriever, golden.
Comori's aldehyde fuchsin stain, staining characteristics of
various substances with, 130t
Comori's methenamine siver stain, staining characteristics
of various substances with, 130t
Cornori's reticulin stain, staining characteristics of various
substances with, 130t

1490 • Index
Gonadotroph(s), 781
Conadotropmts), 798
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 781, 795, 796
Gordius robustus, in cats, 440
Graft-versus-host disease, 719-720
Gram's stain, 116
staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Granular cell tumor, 1294-1296, 1295
Granular degeneration, epidermal. See Epulermolqtic hyperkeratosis.
Cranulocytets), functions of, 556-558
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor deficiency of, 278
Granulocytopathy, 279t
Granuloma(s), bacterial, 302, 311-312,313
dermal, feline, 186
eosinophilic, canine, 1150-1151, 1153-1155,1155-1156
feline, 1150-1151, 1152-1153,1153-1154
foreign-body, 189, 191
linear. See Eosinophilic granuloma, feline.
mycobacterial, 312-321, 317, 318, 320
opportunistic (atypical), 317, 319-321, 320
palisading, 189, 191
preauricular, feline, 1241
sarcoidal, 185, 189, 190
tuberculoid, 189, 189
venereal. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Granuloma and pyogranuloma, sterile idiopathic, 11361140
cause and pathogenesis of, 1136
clinical features of, 1136-1137
clinical management of, 1138-1140
diagnosis of, 1137-1138,1138-1141
in cats, 1134-1135, 1137
in dogs, 1134-1135, 1136-1137
Granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile sterile. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Granulomatous inflammation, 184
Grape seed extract, 209
Grass awn, 1091
Gray collie syndrome, 977-978, 1014
Gra~ng, 1014-1015, 1015
Greasy skin and hair coat with sebaceous gland hyperplasia, idiopathic, 1179, 1180
Great Dane, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058, 1060
antithyroglobulin antibodyiies) in, 852
antithyroid antibodyties) in, 789
callus dermatitis in, 1102
color dilution alopecia in, 967
demodicosis in, 461, 465
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita in, 940
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypothyroidism in, 852
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in, 1136
lymphedema in, 990
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
pododermatitis in, 305
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 76, 79t
sterile pyogranuloma on feet of, 305
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Great Pyrenees, dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
Grenz zone, 164, 166
Greyhound, drug reactions in, 721
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
hair growth in, daily, 6

Greyhound (Continued)
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
Italian, color dilution alopecia in, 967
pattern baldness in, 965
pinnal alopecia in, 887
otitis externa in, 1212
pattern baldness in, 965
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
trichorrhexis nodosa in, 895
vasculitis in, 744
vasculopathy in, cutaneous and renal glomerular, 749,
750,752
familial, 987-989
ventral comedone syndrome in, 1103
Griseofulvin, adverse effects and side effects of, 411
in cats, 357
antifungal therapy with, 357, 409, 410-411
anti-inflammatory properties of, 411
immunomodulatory properties of, 411
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
microsized, 411
dosage and administration of, 357t
teratogenicity of, 357, 411, 1446
ultramicrosized,411
dosage and administration of, 357t
Gris-PEG. See Criseofuloui, ultramicrosized.
Grooming, 207
for cats, 214-215
for dogs, routine, 210
frequency of, 213
special problems in, for cats, 215
for dogs, 213-214
Grover's disease, 138
Growth factorts), in hair cycle, 4-5
Growth hormone, 794-795
and hair growth, 6
deficiency of, 794
excess of. See Acromegaly.
in adrenal hyperplasia-dike syndrome, 846-847
plasma levels, in pituitary dwarfism, 821
therapy with, in pituitary dwarfism, 821
Growth hormone-inhibiting factor (GHIF), 781
Growth hormone-releasing factor (GHRF), 781
Growth hormone-responsive dermatosis. See Hyposomatotropism (pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsive
dermatosis).
Guinea pig, alopecia in, congenital, 1437, 1438
cystic ovaries and, 1437, 1438
bacterial infections in, 1418, 1420, 1430
barberingin,1437
bite wounds in, 1437
candidiasis in, 1431
cheyletiellosis in, 1433
Chirodiscoules caoiae in, 1433, 1434
claws of, overgrowth of, 1439
cryptococcosis in, 1431
demodicosis in, 1433-1434, 1436
dermatophytosis in, 1430-1431,1431
dermatoses of, 1430-1439
digits and paws, necrosis and sloughing of, 1437, 1437
ear chewing in, 1437
ectoparasites on, 1420, 1431-1434,1432, 1434, 1436
ergot poisoning in, 1437
footpads of, hyperkeratosis and cutaneous horns of, 1439
fungal infections in, 1430-1431, 1431
haircoat of, thinning of, at weaning, 1437

Index • 1491
Guinea pig (Continued)
lice in, 1433, 1434
Malassezia dermatitis in, 1431
mites in, 1431-1433,1432-1434
neoplasia in, 1432, 1439
nutritional deficiency in, 1434
Pelodera dermatitis in, 1433
sebaceous gland disorder in, 1437-1439
shedding in, 1437
telogen defluxion in, 1437
trichofolliculoma in, 1432, 1439
trixacariasis in, 1420, 1431-1433, 1432 -1434
viral infections in, 1431
Guinea worm, 437
Gum, in haircoat, 214
Gyropus ovalis, in guinea pigs, 1433

Haarscheiben. See Tylotrich pad.
Habronema spp., 503, 504
in dogs, 440
Haerrwbartonella felis, 531
Haemobartonellosis, feline, 531
Haemodipsus ventricosus, on rabbits, 1449
Hair. See also Alopecia.
age-related changes in, 64
analysis of, as diagnostic tool, 7
awn, 4
barrier function of, 31
colors of, 7-9, 108
conditioners for, 212
dermatophyte collection from, 120
dermatophyte-infected, abnormalities of, 121
disorders of, 950- 975
down, 4
examination of, 108, 109-112
functions of, 4
in endocrine disorders, 780
in immune defense, 274
in nutritional deficiency, 108, 111
lanugo, 4
mechanoreceptors and, 61
pigmentation of, 108
abnormalities of, 108, 110
primary (outercoat, guard), 4, 7, 41, 42
central, 41
lateral, 41
red, acquired, 1022
secondary (undercoat), 4, 7, 39-41, 42
sinus, 6
specimen of, collection of, in fungal infection,
120
tactile, 44-45
telogen, 341
types of, 7-9
Hair care productts), 211-212. See also Shampoo(s).
Hair castts), 108, 111
Hair cycle, 4- 7, 5. See also Hair growth.
Hair disk. See Tylotrich pad.
Hair follicle(s), 2, 39-48. See also Follicular.
age-related changes in, 64-65
anagen, 41, 44, 46, 46, 108, 109
arrangement of, 41, 42
bacterial infection of, 277-278
basement membrane zone (glassy membrane) of, 43, 47,
49
bulb of, 43, 43, 46, 46, 47, 48, 108, 109
catagen, 47, 48, 108, 109

Hair follicle(s) (Continued)
catagenization of, 166
changes in, terminology for, 165-168
components of, 41, 43
degeneration of, 277-278
development of, 4- 7
dysplasia of, 6, 152,153, 166-168
fibrous root sheath of, 43
in epidermal renewal, 48
induction of, 4- 7
inferior segment of, 41, 43
inflammation of. See also Folliculitis; Furunculosis; Perifolliculitis.
assessment of, 195-196
hydropic, 192
lichenoid, 192
secondary, 195-196
infundibulum of, 28, 41, 43, 43
inner root sheath of, 41-43, 44, 44, 48
cuticle of, 42, 44
Henle layer of, 42, 44
Huxley layer of, 42, 44
innervation of, 59, 60, 62
isthmus of, 41, 43, 43
keratinization of, 11, 48
microscopic anatomy of, 10
miniaturized, 168, 198
morphogenesis of, 39
nevi of, 1389, 1390
obstruction of, 277
of sinus hair, 44-45, 45
outer root sheath of, 41, 43, 44, 48, 49, 50
reactivation of, 4- 7
regression of, 4- 7
ruptured, dermatitis caused by, 189
telogen, 43, 48, 49, 50, 108, 109
telogenization of, 166
tumors of, 1263-1270
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1455
Hair germ(s), 2, 49
Hair growth. See also Hair cycle.
androgens and, 797
disorders of, 950-975
estrogens and, 795
neural mechanisms of, 5
regulation of, 5
Hair matrix, 41, 44
Hair pluck examination, for mites, 105-106
technique for, 108
Hair shaft, layers of, 39, 41, 44, 108, 110
morphology of, 108, 109
resident microflora of, 275
structural defects of, 950-956
Hair tractts), 4
Haircoat, color of, and risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders, 76
disorders of, 977-978
acquired, 978
congenital, 977-978
in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 801
greasy, with sebaceous gland hyperplasia, idiopathic,
1179,1180
in hypothyroidism, 783- 784
normal, care of, 207-215. See also Grooming.
thickness of, 3
Hale's colloidal ion stain, staining characteristics of various
substances with, 130t

1492 • Index
Halogenated agent(s), topical, 230-231
Hamartoma. See also Nevus/nevi.
definition of, 177
Hamster, bacterial infections in, 1418, 1439
contact dermatitis in, 1441
demodicosis in, 1439-1440, 1440
dermatophytosis in, 1439
ectoparasites on, 1439-1440, 1440
epitheliotropic lymphoma in, 1432, 1441, 1442
flank scent glands of, 1441
fleas on, 1440
fungal infections in, 1439
hereditary hairlessness in, 1441
hyperadrenocorticism in, 1441
neoplasia in, 1432, 1441-1442,1442
notoedric mange in, 1440
nutritional disorders in, 1441
ringtail in, 1441
syphilis in, 1439
traumatic alopecia and dermatitis in, 1440
Haplonychia, definition of, 1193t
Happy Jack Kennel Dip, 424
Hard pad disease, 523, 523
Harder gland(s), 1185
Havana brown cat, grooming for, 215
Head, common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
Heartworm disease, 439, 643-644, 644, 645
Heat, body, conservation of, mechanisms for, 53-54
dissipation of, mechanisms of, 54
production of, mechanisms for, 53-54
Heat, radiant, bums caused by, 1086-1087, 1087
dermatitis caused by, 897-899
Hederiform ending. See Tylotrich pad.
Helminth parasitets), 431-440
Hemangioendothelioma, malignant. See Hemangiosarcor1Ul.
Hemangioma, 1297-1299
breedis) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1297
clinical findings in, 1297-1298
diagnosis of, 1298, 1298-1299
glabrous, nonpigmented skin (actinic), breed(s) with
predilection for, 1237t
in cats, 528, 1286, 1297-1298
in dogs, 1286, 1297
in mice, 1444
laser surgery for, 259, 260
solar-related, risk for, haircoat color and, 76
Hemangiopericytoma, 1281, 1286, 1302, 1302-1303,
1303
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Hemangiosarcoma, 1299-1302
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1299
claw involvement in, 1198
clinical findings in, 1299-1300
clinical management of, 1300-1302
diagnosis of, 1300, 1301
glabrous, nonpigmented skin (actinic), breed(s) with
predilection for, 1237t
in cats, 1286, 1299, 1300
in dogs, 1299
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1455
laser surgery for, 259
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
solar-induced, 1299
visceral, cutaneous metastases of, 1373
Hematopoiesis, canine cyclic, 1014

Hematoxylin and eosin stain (H & E), 129, 130t
Hemidesmosome(s), 13, 19, 20, 22t, 35
Hemitrichosis. See Hypertrichosis, unilateral.
Hemogram(s), in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
Hemolysin(s), 275
Hemorrhage, from muzzle, 304
subungual, 1197, 1198
Heparin sulfate, 36t, 38
Hepatocutaneous syndrome, 868
Hepatoid cellts), of canine tail gland, 54-55
Hepatoid gland(s), 1045, 1047
Hepatoid tissue, 835
Hepatomegaly, in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
Herbal medicine, 263
Hereditary lupoid dermatosis, of Gennan shorthaired
pointers, 941, 948-949, 949
Herpesvirus infection, in cats, 171
(l'- Herpesvirus infection, feline rhinotracheitis caused by,
524-525
pseudorabies caused by, 524
Heterodoxus spiniger, 487, 490
Heterozygosity, loss of, 65
Hexachlorophene, 230
Hexadene, 917. See also Chlorhexidine, shampoo.
Hexidine, 1035
Hexylresorcinol, 230
Hidradenitis, 170, 171
Himalayan cat, acromelanism in, 1012-1013
basal cell tumors in, 1261
dermatophytosis in, 347
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
epitrichial cysts in, 1381
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
griseofulvin side effects in, 357
grooming for, 215
hair color of, 8
idiopathic facial dermatitis of, 920- 921, 922
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
seborrhea in, 920
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
urticaria pigmentosa in, 997-998
Histacalm, 229, 229t
Histamine, in atopy, 580
in pruritus, 62, 62t
Histamine-releasing factors, 556
Histiocyte(s), cutaneous, 39
in dermatitis, 187, 187-188
Histiocytic sarcoma. See Sarcoma(s), histiocytic.
Histiocytoma, 1334, 1346, 1347-1350,1348-1351. See
also Transmissible venereal tumor.
atypical. See Neuroendocrine tumoris), primary cutaneous.
benign fibrous, 1354-1355, 1355, 1356
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
eyelid, 1288
malignant fibrous, 1348, 1355-1357,1357-1358
Histiocytosis, cutaneous, 1346, 1348, 1353-1354,
1354
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Langerhans' cell, malignant, 1347
reactive, 1347
malignant, 1346, 1347, 1348, 1350-1351, 1351
breedis) with predilection for, 1237t
systemic, 1346, 1348, 1352-1353, 1353
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t

Index' 1493
Histoplasma capsulatum, 337, 400
culture of, 121
stain for, 119
Histoplasmosis, cause of, 400
clinical management of, 402-403
diagnosis of, 401-402, 402
in cats, clinical findings in, 401, 401
in dogs, clinical findings in, 400-401, 402
in ferrets, 1419
pathogenesis of, 400
Hives. See Urticaria.
Hoeppli-Splendore phenomenon, 317
Holistic medicine, 263
Holocrine gland(s). See Sebaceous glandes).
Homeobox genets), 93
Homeopathy, 263
Hookworm dermatitis, 431-432, 432, 433
claw involvement in, 1195
Hordeum jubatum, 1091
Hordeum murinum, 1091
Hordoleum (stye), 1186
Hormonal hypersensitivity, 644-647, 646, 647
Hormonets), and hair growth, 6. See also specific hormone.
Homis), cutaneous, 1244,1392, 1394-1396,1396-1398
feline leukemia virus and, 517
in dogs, 1241, 1242
multiple, in cats, 528
Hom cysts (keratin cysts), 156
Hom pearls (squamous pearls), 156
Hornetts), 505-506
Horsefly, 502
Hot spotts). See Puotraumatic dermatitis; Pqotraumatic folliculitis.
Hound, Afghan, delayed gonadal maturation in, 844
demodicosis in, 461
eyelid tumor in, 1188
grooming of, 214
hypoandrogenism in, 837
hypothyroidism in, 852
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
tricholemmoma in, 1264
Basset, actinic keratoses in, 1391
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
immunodeficiency in, 279t
lymphomas in, 1331
Malassezia dermatitis in, 364, 365
Mycobacterium avium infection in, 315
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 77t
seborrhea in, 913, 915, 1032
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
Humectantts), 227, 1028
Humilac, 235
Humoral immunity, 558-560
Husky, Siberian. See Siberian husky.
Hutch bum, 1450
Hyaline bodyues). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Hyalinization, of dermal collagen, 156-157
Hyalohyphomycosis, definition of, 376-377
Hyaluronate, 38
Hyaluronic acid, 38

Hycodan. See Hydrocodone.
Hydra- Pearls cream rinse, 229t
Hydration, of skin, 1025
Hydro B-1020, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Hydrocarbonis), 1028
chlorinated, antiparasitic therapy with, 424
Hydrocodone, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Hydrocortisone, 232
in shampoo, 223
Hydrogen peroxide, 231
Hydropic degeneration, epidermal, 143, 146
Hydro-Plus, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Hydrotherapy, 220-221
for bacterial infection, 280-281
a-Hydroxyacid(s) (2% to 10%), topical, 235
Hydroxychloroquine sulfate, 678
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
Hydroxylysine, 36
4-Hydroxyproline, 36
Hydroxyzine, 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061-1063
Hygroma, 1102
Hy-Lyt°efa, 229t, 917, 1028, 1035, 1113
Hymenoptera, 505-506
Hyperadrenocorticism, infections in, 803-804
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease, Cushing's syndrome), 278, 781, 782, 790
alopecia in, 780
differential diagnosis of, 804-805
iatrogenic, 799, 800
in cats, 815-819
adrenal function tests in, 816-818
causes and pathogenesis of, 815-816
clinical features of, 802, 816, 817
clinical management of, 818-819
diagnosis of, 816-818
histopathology of, 816
in dogs, 158, 176, 798-815
causes of, 799
differentiation of, tests for, 810
clinical features of, 800-804, 801-803, 840
clinical management of, 810-815
diagnosis of, 804-810, 807-808
tests for, 809-810
iatrogenic, management of, 815
pathogenesis of, 799
pituitary-dependent, 799
clinical management of, 811-814
prognosis for, 810
in ferrets, 1421-1424, 1422-1423
in hamsters, 1441
red hair in, 1022
Hyperandrogenism, in male dogs, 834-836, 835, 836,
837
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, feline, 1133-1135, 11341135, 1187
Hyperestrogenism, 781, 795- 796
in female animals, 817, 829-831, 830, 831
in ferrets, 1424-1425, 1425
red hair in, 1022
Hyperglucocorticoidism, 252, 789-790, 1399
diagnosis of, 805
Hypergranulosis, 134, 137
Hyperkeratosis, 132-133,133-136, 1025
basketweave, 132, 134
compact, 132, 134
epidermal, 180
footpad, 930, 935, 935-936, 1114-1115

1494 • Index
Hyperkeratosis (Continued)
laminated, 132, 134
nasal, 936
orthokeratotic (anuclear), 132, 132, 1025
diffuse, with perivascular dermatitis, 178-179
disproportionate follicular, 133, 136
with perivascular dermatitis, 179
parakeratotic (nucleated), 132-133, 133, 1025
diffuse, with perivascular dermatitis, 179
focal, overlying epidermal papillae, 133, 135
focal, with perivascular dermatitis, 179
Hypermelanosis. See Hyperpigmentation.
Hyperonychia, definition of, 1193t
Hyperpigmentation, 86, 151-152, 153, 236, 1006-1013
acquired, 1009-1013
congenital and hereditary, 975-977
drug-induced, 1011-1012
genetic, 1006-1009
hormone-associated, 1011
in feline acromelanism, 1012-1013
in pigmented tumors, 1013, 1013
papillomavirus-associated, 1012, 1013
postinflammatory, 96, 151-152, 1009-1011,1011
Hyperplasia, epidermal, 134-135, 138, 139, 180
irregular, 134-135
papillated, 135, 139
pseudocarcinomatous, 135, 139
psoriasiform, 135, 138
regular, 135, 138
Hyperprolactinemia, 798
Hypersensitivity, and mucinosis, 1175
antidepressants for, 569-570
antihistamines for, 567-569, 569t
arachnid, 636-642
bacterial, 637,647-650,649
contact. See Contact hypersensitivity (allergic contact
dermatitis) .
cutaneous basophil, 562
cyclosporme for, 570-571
flea bite. See Flea bite hypersensitivity.
food. See Food hypersensitivity.
foot licking in, 1066
fungal,650
hormonal, 644-647
in dermatophytosis, 341-342
insect, 198, 486-487, 636-642. See also Flea bite hypersensitivity; Mosquito bite hypersensitivity; Tick bite
hypersensitivity.
intestinal parasite, 642-643
mosquito bite, feline, 635-636, 637, 638
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents for, 566-567
otitis extema caused by, 1210-1211, 1211-1212
parasitic, 627-644. See also specific parasite.
skin disorders related to, 571-650. See also specific disorder.
storage mite- related, 640
systemic glucocorticoids for, 570
therapy for, 563-571
avoidance as, 563, 595-597
fatty acids in, 564-566
regimens for, 563, 563t
topical, 563-564
tick bite, 635
to Malassezia antigens, 364, 650
type I (anaphylactic, immediate), 561-562
late-phase, 562
type II (cytotoxic), 561, 562
type III (immune complex), 561, 562

Hypersensitivity (Continued)
type IV (cell-mediated, delayed), 561, 562-563
Hyperthermia, for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
therapeutic use of, 237-238
Hyperthyroidism, feline, 859, 867, 867-868
Hypertrichosis, definition of, 85
unilateral, .5
Hypervitaminosis A, 1116
Hyphalhyphae, 336
cenocytic, 336
examination for, 119, 121
septate, 336
sparsely septate, 336
spiral, 124, 124
Hyphomyces destruens. See Pythium insidiosum.
Hyphomycosis. See Pythiosis.
Hypoandrogenism, 830, 837-838,838
Hupoderma spp., in ferrets, 1419
Hypodermis. See Subcutis.
Hypogonadism, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
definition of, 833
in intact female animals, 830, 833-834
in intact male animals, 842, 843-845
Hypogranulosis, 134
Hypokeratosis, 133-134, 1025
Hypomelanosis. See Hypopigmentation.
Hypophysectomy, in dogs, 811
Hypophysis, functional anatomy of, 780-781
Hypopigmentation, 1014-1021
acquired,1019-1021
breed-associated, suspect genetic, 1014-1019
canine, 1008-1009
congenital and hereditary, 975
drug-related, 1020, 1020
genetic, 1014
idiopathic, 1008, 1021, 1021
in leishmaniasis, 1019, 1019-1020
in neoplasia, 1008, 1021
metabolic, 1020
mucocutaneous, 1008-1009, 1017-1018
nasal, 1016-1017
seasonal, 1017
postinflammatory, 1019, 1019-1020
Hypopigmentation (hypomelanosis), 96, 152-154, 154
Hypopituitarism, 781, 818
Hypoplasia, epidermal, 135-136
Hyposensitization, for canine atopy, 597-601, 598t
for feline atopy, 608, 609t
Hyposomatotropism (pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsive dermatosis), 794-795
adult-onset, breed(s) with predilection for, 75
in dogs, 203
in mature dog, 817, 822-824, 823-825
Hypothalamus, functional anatomy of, 780- 781
Hypothyroidism, 278, 781, 782, 783
alopecia in, 780
canine, 167, 851-865
cause and pathogenesis of, 851-852
clinical features of, 852-860, 854-860
clinical management of, 863-865
congenital,858-860
diagnosis of, 859, 860-863
secondary, 852
treatment of, 864
feline, 865-866, 866
immune-mediated, 789
in ferrets, 1426
otitis extema in, 1210-1211

Index • 1495
Hypothyroidism (Continued)
red hair in, 1022
secondary, 789
skin changes in, 783- 784
tertiary, 789
Hypotrichosis, congenital, definition of, 958
in cats, 959, 960-962
in dogs, 954, 958-959,959, 960
definition of, 85
tardive, 965-974

Ice, antipruritic therapy with, 229t
Ichthyosis, 1029
canine, 914-915
cause and pathogenesis of, 922-923
clinical features of, 914, 923, 924
clinical management of, 242, 243, 924-925
definition of, 922
diagnosis of, 923-924, 925
Harlequin, 31
hypergranulosis in, 137
X-linked, 31
Iggo dome. See Tylotrich pad.
Iggo-Pinkus dome. See Tylotrich pad.
IGR(s) (insect growth regulators), 495
Imaverol. See Enilconazole rinse.
Imidacloprid, 423, 497, 498
antiparasitic therapy with, 426
Imidazole, antifungal therapy with, 411
topical, 409
Imipramine, 1057
Immune complextes), 559
deposition of, in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
vasculitis caused by, in mice, 1444
Immune system, of skin. See Skin immune system.
Immune-mediated skin disease, 667-769. See also specific
disease.
claw involvement in, 1195, 1196-1197
clinical management of, 244
diagnosis of, 667-671
primary (autoimmune), 667
secondary, 667
treatment of, 671-678
Immunocytochemistry, 202-204, 204t
Immunodeficiency, acquired, 278
and canine demodicosis, 463-464
and leishmaniasis, 535
in German shepherds, 307, 308
management of, 286
primary, 278, 279t
Immunofluorescence testing, 202
in immune-mediated skin disease, 668-671, 669-670
in systemic lupus erythematosus, 707, 709- 710
salt-split skin for, 694
Immunoglobulin(s), epidermal, 31, 32
in cerumen, 1204
in pemphigus complex, 680
in vascular endothelium, 56
Immunoglobulin E, 561-562, 574-577
Immunoglobulin gene superfamily, 545
Immunohistochemistry, in immune-mediated skin disease,
668
Immunologic disorderis), 992-995
Immunomodulation, for chronic recurrent bacterial infections,286-287
for dogs with immunodeficiency, 286

Immunoperoxidase testing, in immune-mediated skin disease, 668
Immunoregulin, 286-287
Immunosuppressive agent(s), 671-678, 672t
Impetigo, 288-290, 289, 290
bullous, 289, 290
staphylococcal, 288
in dogs, 290
Impression smearts), for Malassezia spp., 368
technique for, 112-115, 116-117
Imuran. See Azathioprine.
In situ hybridization, 1239
In vitro lymphocyte blastogenesis (IVLB) test, 463-464
Inca hairless dog, 957
India ink, for fungal staining, 119
Indolent ulcer, feline, 1142, 1148-1149, 1149
Indole-5,6-quinone, 17
Infection(s), bacterial. See Bacterial infection(s).
fungal. See Fungal infection(s).
viral. See Viral disease! s).
Inhalant dermatitis, allergic. See Atopy.
Inhibin, 795
Injection site reactionls), 725, 726
canine, 896
drug-induced, 721, 722t
feline, 902
in ferrets, 1426
Insectts), 486-500
hypersensitivity to, 198, 486-487, 636-642. See also
Flea bite hypersensitivity; Mosquito bite hypersensitivity; Tick bite hypersensitivity.
Insect development inhibitoris), systemic, antiparasitic
therapy with, 430
Insect growth regulators (IGRs), 495
antiparasitic therapy with, 426
Insecticidets), regulation of, 424
Insulin hypersensitivity, in pituitary dwarfism, 821
Insulin-like growth factor-l (IGF-I), 795
in pituitary dwarfism, 821
Integrin(s), functions of, 13-14
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
in stratum basale, 13
subunits of, 13
Interceptor. See Milbemycin.
Interdigital pyoderma (pododermatitis). See Podotlermatitis.
Interface dermatitis, drug-induced, 729
hydropic, 180, 181
lichenoid, 180, 181
Interferonis), therapy with, 252-253
a- Interferon, for feline rhinotracheitis, 525
human recombinant, for recurrent bacterial infections,
286
International Veterinary Acupuncture Society, 263
Interrupt, 494
Interstitial cell tumor(s), 837, 838, 843
Interstitial dermatitis, 182- 184, 183, 184
drug-induced, 729
Intertrigo, 288, 1097, 110,5- 1108, 1106
body fold, 1106, 1107
facial fold, 1097, 1107
lip fold, 1106, 1107
tail fold, 1106, 1107
vulvar fold, 1106, 1107
Intestinal parasite hypersensitivity, 642-643
Intradermal allergy testing. See Allergy testes), intradermal.
Intrinsic factors, in hair cycle, 5-6
Intron-A, 253

1496 • Index
Invisible dermatosis, 199-201
Involucrin, 28
formation of, 29
Iodidets), antifungal therapy with, 414
Iodine, in shampoo, 223
in topical therapy, 230-231
Iodism, 414
Iodophorts), 231
Irish setter. See Setter, Irish.
Irish terrier. See Terrier, Irish.
Irish water spaniel. See Spaniel, Irish water.
Irish wolfhound. See Wolfhound, Irish.
Isodesmosine, 37
Isothiocyanate(s), 680
Isotretinoin, 241-242
adverse effects and side effects of, 1029
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1029
dosage and administration of, 242-243
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers,
929
indications for, 242, 1029
otic therapy with, 1229-1230
Isoxsuprine, for Raynaud-like disease in dogs, 1195
Itching. See Pruritus.
Itraconazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 411, 413,
721, 743, 753
antifungal therapy with, 357, 410, 411, 413
anti-inflammatory effects of, 413
dosage and administration of, 357t
immunomodulatory effects of, 413
otic therapy with, 1229
Ivermectin, 428, 445
adverse effects and side effects of, 428-429
anti-inflammatory properties of, 429
for canine demodicosis, 472, 473
for feline demodicosis, 476
for scabies, 483, 484
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1229
regulation of, 424
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 429
toxicosis, in cats, 429
in dogs, 428-429
Ivomec. See Ivermectin.
Ixodes spp., Lyme borreliosis transmission by, 326
Ixodes dammini, 444
Ixodes ricinus, 444
Ixodes scapularis, 444

Jack Russell terrier. See Terrier, Jack Russell.
Jejunal adenocarcinoma, cutaneous metastases of, 13731374
Juvenile cellulitis. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Juvenile hormone analogis), in insect control, 426
Juvenile pyoderma. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
[uvenoldts), 426

Karyolysis, definition of, 136
Karyorrhexis, definition of, 136
Keeshond, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome in, 847
adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
hypogonadism in, 844-845
keratoacanthoma in, 1248

Keeshond (Continued)
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
KeraSolv, 226, 1027-1028
Keratin, 20-22, 29, 48, 220
hard, 29
in epidermal barrier function, 31
soft, 29
Keratinase, from Microsporum canis, 341
Keratinization, defects of, 913-949, 1025-1053
drug-induced, 1052, 1052-1053
ear involvement in, 1205, 1212
in mice, 1444
disorders of, 31
epidermal, 29
follicular, 48
infundibular, 48
inner root sheath and hair shaft medullary, 48
trichilemmal, 11, 48
excessive, 166, 167, 790
trichogenic, 48
Keratinocytets), acantholytic, 143, 155
adhesion of, 19, 22t
antimicrobial peptides synthesized by, 33
apoptotic, 139-140, 740
changes in, in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
in erythema multiforme, 731-732
cultured, 31
cutaneous nerves and, 59
functions of, 26, 29
immunohistochemistry of, 20-22
immunologic functions of, 550-551
in epidermal immunity, 26
phagocytic functions of, 22
ultrastructure of, 20, 23
Keratinosome(s), 22
Keratoacanthoma, 1029, 1241, 1248-1249,1249-1250
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
clinical management of, 242
in hamsters, 1442
in rats, 1455
subungual, 1198
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, 283, 919
treatment of, 674
Keratogenesis, 29-31
Keratohyalin, synthesis of, 29
Keratohyalin granule(s), 48
epidermal, 11
from normal skin, 115, 116
functions of, 26
morphology of, 26-27
Keratolinin, 28
Keratolytic agent(s), antiseborrheic therapy with, 10261028
Keratoplastic agentis), antiseborrheic therapy with, 10261028
Keratosis, 1390-1396
actinic, 1391-1392, 1393, 1394
lichenoid, 1391-1394, 1392-1393, 1395
periocular, 1394, 1396
seborrheic, 1392, 1394, 1395
Kerion, 650
dermatophytic, 343, 344-345, 351
Kerry blue terrier. See Terrier, Kerry blue.
Ketoconazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 411, 412
antifungal therapy with, 357, 410, 411-413
dosage and administration of, 357t

Index' 1497
Ketoconazole (Continued)
drug interactions with, 412
for adrenal neoplasia, 815
for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 812
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers,
929
for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
for leishmaniasis, 538
hypomelanosis caused by, 1020
in shampoo, 223
otic therapy with, 1229
Klebsiella spp., in mice, 1442
Klebsiella pneumoniae, infection by, in rats, 1452
KOH, for keratin clearance, in fungal diagnosis, 120
Koilocytosis, 142-143,145
Komondor, grooming of, 214
Korat cat, grooming for, 215
Kuvasz, dermatomyositis in, 940

Labiogram(s), 3
Laboratory testis), 94-131
Labrador retriever. See Retriever, Labrador.
Lacrimal gland(s), 1185
Lactic acid, 235, 1028
Lactobacillus spp., otitis media caused by, 1214t
Lacunae. See Cleft(s).
Lagochilascaris major, in cats and dogs, 440, 442
Lamellar bodyues), 1025
Lamellar granule(s), 29-30, 30
Lamina densa (basal lamina), of basement membrane zone,
34, 35
Lamina fibroreticularis, of basement membrane zone. See
Sublamina densa area (lamina jibroreticularis).
Lamina lucida (lamina rara), of basement membrane zone,
34, 35
Lamina rara, of basement membrane zone. See Lamina
lucida (lamina rara).
Laminin, 13, 36t
in cell type identification, 204t
Lamisil. See Terbinajine.
Langerhans' cell(s), 10, 22-25, 24, 25
age-related changes in, 64
development of, 2
functions of, 24, 26
histochemistry of, 24
immunologic functions of, 551-552
immunophenotype of, 24
in epidermal immunity, 26
in hair follicle, 48
Langerhans' granule(s). See Birbeck's granule(s).
Langer's liners), 9
Lanolin, 1028
Lanugo hair, 4, 41
Laser Doppler flowmetry, 57-58
Laser surgery, 259, 260
Laser therapy, for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1357
Lathyrism, 37
Latrodectus spp., 484-485
Latrodectus bishopi, 484
Latrodectus mactans, 484
Leflunomide, for graft-versus-host disease, 720
immunosuppressive therapy with, 674-675
Leg(s), common and less common dermatoses of, 105t
Leiomyoma, 1312-1313,1313, 1314t
Leiomyosarcoma, 1312-1313
Leishmaniasis, 278, 530-531, 534-538, 535-537

Leishmaniasis (Continued)
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
hypopigmentation in, 1019, 1019-1020
in humans, 534
visceral, 195, 537, 538
Lentiginosis profusa, 1006
Lentigo, 87, 96, 1006, 1007
Lentigo simplex in orange cats, 1006-1007, 1008, 1009
Leprosy, canine, 316-319
feline, 315-316, 317, 318
in rats, 1452
Leptospirosis, 1089
Lesionts). See Skin lesion(s).
Leukemia, skin lesions of, 1374-1375
Leukemia cutis, 1374
Leukeran. See Chlorambucil.
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis, 181-182, 182
Leukoderma, 96,975, 1017-1018, 1021
Leukonychia, definition of, 1193t
Leukotrichia, 96, 975, 1021
in radiation damage, 1088, 1088
periocular, 1021, 1022
Leukotriene(s), 560
effects of, on skin, 208
in pruritus, 62, 62t
Levamisole, adverse effects and side effects of, 286, 721,
735
for recurrent bacterial infections, 286
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
Levothyroxine, for hypothyroidism, in cats, 866
in dogs, 862-865
Lhasa apso, atopy in, 581
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
food hypersensitivity in, 618
glucocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
juvenile cellulitis in, 1213
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
Malassezia dermatitis in, 348-349
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Lice. See Louse/lice.
Lichenification, 87, 99
Lichenoid dermatosis, 1126-1127, 1130-1132, 1132
Lichenoid lesionts), drug-induced, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
Lidocaine, adverse effects and side effects of, in kittens
and puppies, 129
effects of, on microorganisms, 128
precautions with, 129
Light trapts), for flea control, 496
Lime sulfur, 233-234
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
Lime sulfur rinse, 234, 356, 356t, 427
antifungal therapy with, 410
for feline demodicosis, 475, 476
for scabies, 482
D-Limonene, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Lincomycin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,282
resistance to, 282
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Lincosamideis), efficacy of, against staphylococcal infection,
283
resistance to, 282
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Lindane dip, 424
Linear granuloma. See Eosinophilic granuloma, feline.

1498 • Index
Linear 19A bullous dermatosis, 694, 701
Linear 19A pustular dermatosis, canine, 748, 756, 756
Linear preputial dermatosis, 830, 839, 839
Linkin,36t
Linognathus setosus, 487, 489, 490
Linoleic acid, 208-209, 235, 1113
topical therapy with, 209
Linolenic acid, 208, 239, 1113
Liothyronine, for hypothyroidism, in cats, 866
in dogs, 862-865
Lipis), common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
hypopigmentation of, congenital, 1018
upper, idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of, in dogs, 1178
Lip fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
Lipid(s), dermal deposits of, 160, 161
epidermal, 28-31, 51
intercellular, 29-30
Lipocortin-1, 245
Lipocyteis), 63, 1156
development of, 2
Lipoma(s),1306, 1308-1311,1309-1311
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in rats, 1455
infiltrative, 1308-1309
Lipomatosis, diffuse, idiopathic, 1173, 1173-1175
Liposarcoma, 1281, 1311-1312, 1312
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
in cats, 528
sternal, cutaneous metastases of, 1373
I3-Lipotropic hormone (13-lipotropin), 17
Listeria rrwnocytogenes, 327
Listeriosis, 327-328
Listrophorus (Leporacarus) gibbus, 1434-1435
in rabbits, 1448-1449
Local anestheticis), antipruritic therapy with, 230
for pruritus, 228
Lone Star tickts), 444
Longhaired cans), 215
Loricrin,28
functions of, 26- 27
Loshed,894
Lotionts), 218t, 224-225
Lotrimin. See Clotrimazole.
Lotrisone. See Clotrimazole/betamethasone.
Lousellice. See also Pediculosis.
characteristics of, 487
human pubic, 487
nits, 108, 112, 488
on guinea pigs, 1433, 1434
on mice, 1443
on rabbits, 1449
on rats, 1453
Loxosceles spp., 484-485
Loxosceles reclusa, 484
Loxosceles unicolor, 484
Lufeneron, 430, 499
Lumpy jaw, in ferrets, 1417
Lupoid onychodystrophy, 745
symmetric, 1195-1198, 1196-1197
Lupus erythematosus, 701-717
classification of, 701- 702, 703t
cutaneous (discoid), 712-716
canine vesicular, 707
cause and pathogenesis of, 712
characteristics of, 702
clinical features of, 712-714, 713, 714, 1187
clinical management of, 716
exfoliative, 707, 717

Lupus erythematosus (Continued)
forms of, 702
histopathology of, 714-716, 715
in cats, 714, 714
in dogs, 712-714, 713, 1187
in humans, 707
pathogenesis of, 702
pigmentary incontinence in, 163
vesicular, 98, 717, 946-947
drug-induced, 704
in dogs, 722t
in cats, 696-697, 707, 708-709
clinical features of, 696, 705
in dogs, 172, 173, 696-697, 707, 708-709
cause and pathogenesis of, 704-705
clinical features of, 696, 705
diagnostic criteria for, 710t, 710-711
in humans, 702- 704
panniculitis of, 197
pigmentary incontinence in, 163
systemic, 702, 704- 711
bullous, 694
causes of, 13
cause and pathogenesis of, 704- 705
clinical features of, 696, 705
clinical management of, 711
dennatohistopathology of, 707, 708-709
diagnosis of, 142, 705-711
in cats, 696-697, 707, 708-709
in dogs, 172, 173, 696-697, 707, 708-709
diagnostic criteria for, 71Ot, 710-711
in humans, 707, 709-710
prognosis for, 711
Lupus profundus, 197
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 781, 796, 998
Lutropin. See Luteinizing hormone (LH).
Lutzomqia spp., 534
Lyell's syndrome. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
LymDyp. See Lime sulfur rinse.
Lyme borreliosis, 326-327
Lymph vesselis), cutaneous, 58, 59
Lymphangioma, 1305, 1306
Lymphangiosarcoma, 1305-1308, 1306-1308
in cats, 1305, 1306
in dogs, 1305
Lymphedema, 990- 992
cause and pathogenesis of, 990
clinical features of, 988-989, 990-991,991
clinical management of, 992
definition of, 990
diagnosis of, 991, 991-992, 992
in vasculitis, 746
Lymphocyte(s), cutaneous, 39
functions of, 552-553
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 118t
Lymphocytic mural folliculitis, idiopathic, of cats, 907-909,
907-910
Lymphocytic (Hashimoto's) thyroiditis, 851-852
tests for, 788-789
Lymphohistiocytic infiltration, in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
Lymphoid nodules, 174,175
Lymphokinets), 543
Lymphoma, 1330-1342. See also Neuroendocrine tumor(s),
primary cutaneous.
and pseudolymphoma, differentiation of, histologic criteria for, 1341-1342, 1343t
B cell, 1331

Index· 1499
Lymphoma (Continued)
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
epitheliotropic, 1021, 1029, 1331, 1331, 1333-1340,
1334-1339, 1347
clinical management of, 242, 244
drug-induced, 725
in cats, 910
in hamsters, 1432, 1441, 1442
in mice, 1444
of eyelid, 1188, 1189
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1451, 1452
large-cell, 1331
nonepitheliotropic,1324, 1331-1333,1332
T cell, 1331
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis, 1340, 1341, 1342
Lymphomatosis. See Lymphoma.
Lymphosarcoma. See also Lymphoma.
claw involvement in, 1198
in cats, 528
in dogs, cytologic diagnosis of, 114
transmissible. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Lynxacarus radovsky, 446, 447. See also Cat fur miteis).
Lysine, deficiency of, 1020
for feline rhinotracheitis, 525
Lysosomal hydrolasets), 37
Lysozyme, in cell type identification, 204t

MacKenzie (toothbrush) specimen collection method,
120
Macroconidia, collection of, 122
in fungal identification, 122
Macrolide antibioticis), anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties of, 285
resistance to, 282
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Macronychia, definition of, 1193t
Macrophage(s), in cytologic diagnosis, 113, 118t
tissue, functions of, 553
Maculeis), 86, 87
erythematous, 86
Maculopapular (morbilliform) Iesionts), drug-induced, in
cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
Madurella grisea, 377
Maduromycosis, 377
Maggot(s). See Myiasis.
Magnesium sulfate, for bacterial infection, 281
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 545-548
Malamute, chondrodysplasia in, 820
demodicosis in, 461
follicular dysplasia in, 971
hypogonadism in, 844
hypothyroidism in, 852
periocular dermatosis in, 1286
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
wooly, male hypogonadism in, 842
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1119, 1199
Malassezia spp., cytologic examination for, 366-370
in cats, 363
lipid-dependent, 363, 371
non-lipid-dependent, 363, 371
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
skin scrapings for, 366-368

Malassezia spp. (Continued)
superficial mycoses caused by, 339. See also Malassezia
dermatitis.
Malassezia canis. See Malassezia pachydennatis.
Malassezia dermatitis, 363-374, 1060-1061
acanthosis nigricans and, 976
acrodermatitis and, 993
atopy and. See Atopy.
cause of, 363
claw involvement in, 1195
clinical management of, 371-374
diagnosis of, 119-121, 366-371, 369-373
epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers and,
928-929
follicular parakeratosis and, 926, 927
foot licking in, 1066
hypothyroidism and, 853-855
in cats, clinical findings in, 366, 368
in dogs, 370-372
clinical findings in, 348-349, 365-366, 367
dermatohistopathology of, 158
pigmentary incontinence in, 163
in guinea pigs, 1431
pathogenesis of, 363-365
pododermatitis caused by, 305
redlbrown claws in, 1022
rinses for, 410
risk factors for, 364-365
seborrhea and, 915-916, 918, 1030, 1034,
1035
topical therapy for, 409
zinc-responsive dermatosis and, 1120
zoonotic aspects of, 366
Malassezia furfur, 363, 364
Malassezia globosa, 363
Malassezia obtusa, 363
Malassezia otitis extema, 366
pathogenesis of, 364
Malassezia pachydermatis, and Staphylococcus aureus, synergism of, 33
as resident flora, in dogs, 34
characteristics of, 363
culture of, 371
cytologic examination for, 369, 369
diagnosis of, 114, 117, 119-121
enzymatic properties of, 364
in anal sacs, 1201
in humans, 366
in normal flora, of cats and dogs, 364
in surface debris, 155
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215
populations of, variability in, 370
public health considerations with, 1215
strains (sequevars) of, 363-364
Malassezia paronychia, 1189
M alassezia restricta, 363
Malassezia slooffiae, 363
Malassezia sympodialis, 363, 366
cytologic examination for, 369
Malathion, 425
for feline demodicosis, 475
Male feminizing syndrome, idiopathic, 851
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma, 1281
in rats, 1455
Mallophaga, characteristics of, 487, 489, 490
Maltese dilution, 968
and feline hair color, 9
hair in, 108, 110

1500 • Index
Mammary adenocarcinoma, 1021
cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
Mammotroph(s), 781
Manchester terrier. See Terrier, Manchester.
Mange, demodectic. See Demodicosis.
follicular. See Demodicosis.
notoedric. See also Scabies, feline.
in hamsters, 1440
otodectic, 451, 452
in ferrets, 1419
psoroptic, in rabbits, 1447, 1448
red. See Demodicosis.
sarcoptic. See also Scabies, canine.
in ferrets, 1419, 1420
Mannan, 336, 341
Manx cat, grooming for, 215
tail fold intertrigo in, 1107
Marbofloxacin, otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Masson trichome stain, staining characteristics of various
substances with, 130t
Mast cell(s), cutaneous nerves and, 59
dermal, 39, 40
epidermal, 156, 157, 158
fixation of, 39
functions of, 553-556, 554
in cytologic diagnosis, 114, 118t
perivascular, 57
staining of, 39
subtypes of, in dogs, 39
Mast cell mediator(s), 553-556, 555t
Mast cell tumorts), 1320-1330
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1320
claw involvement in, 1198
clinical findings in, 1320-1323
clinical management of, 1323-1330, 1328, 1329
by stage, 1325, 1329t
diagnosis of, 1323, 1326-1328, 1328t, 1329t
histologic classification of, 1325, 1329t
in cats, 1322-1323,1324,1325, 1326, 1328
in dogs, 1306, 1320-1322, 1321, 1322, 1326-1327
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in mice, 1444
of eyelid, 1188, 1189
staging of, 1325, 1329t
Mastiff, bull, congenital hypothyroidism in, 852
follicular dysplasia in, 971
vitiligo in, 1015
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
Neapolitan, undifferentiated sarcoma in, 1319
pododermatitis in, 305
Mastitis, 302
Matts), in haircoat, 213
Matin de Naples, cutis laxa in, 987
Max Joseph spaces, 147
Mechanoreceptor(s), 61, 62
Medical history, in diagnosis, 82-84
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
therapy with, for feline psychogenic dermatitis, 1070
in pituitary dwarfism, 821-822
Medulla, of hair shaft, 39, 41, 44, 108, 110
Medullary trichomalacia, 895, 951-953, 952, 953
Megace. See Megestrol acetate.
Megestrol acetate, therapy with, for acral lick dermatitis,
1063

Megestrol acetate (Continued)
for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
for feline psychogenic dermatitis, 1070
Meglumine antimonate, therapy with, for leishmaniasis,
538
Meibomian gland(s), 1185
Meissner's corpuscle, innervation of, 59, 61, 62
Melaleuca oil, topical therapy with, 236
Melanin, 96, 1005
photoprotective effects of, 16
types of, 16-17
Melanin granule(s), epidermal, 11, 16, 16
from normal skin, 115, 116
in sebaceous glands, 152, 153
Melanization, regulation of, 1005
a-Melanocortin (a-MSH), actions of, 17
Melanocytets), 10, 14-19
age-related changes in, 64
and keratinocytes, interaction of, 16, 17
appearance of, 14, 15
cell surface receptors on, 17
dendritic, 15
dermal, 39
development of, 2
epidermal, 14, 15
follicular, 14
functions of, 16
ultrastructure of, 16, 18
Melanocytoma, 1013, 1348, 1359, 1360, 1361
dermal, 96
in cats, 174
in gerbils, 1429-1430
in hamsters, 1441
pilar neurocristic, 1359, 1361
Melanoderma. See Hyperpigmentation.
Melanoderma and alopecia, in Yorkshire terriers, 964, 974975,975
Melanogenesis, 17, 18
Melanoma, 1013, 1359, 1361-1364, 1363, 1364
claw involvement in, 1198
clear cell (balloon cell), 1363
in cats, 528, 1362, 1362, 1363, 1363, 1364
in dogs, 1361, 1361-1362,1362,1363
in gerbils, 1429-1430
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1451
in rats, 1455
oral, cutaneous metastases of, 1373
pilar neurocristic, 1362-1363
signet-ring, 1363
subungual, 1361
Melanophage(s), 162-163
Melanosis, macular, in dogs, 837, 839-840
perifollicular, 168, 169, 195
sebaceous gland, 170
Melanosomets), 17, 1005
stages of, 18-19
Melanotrichia, 96
drug-induced, 1011-1012
hormone-associated, 1011, 1012
postinflammatory, 1008-1009, 1010-1011
Melatonin, 1005
formulations of, 254
therapy with, 253-254
for seasonal flank alopecia, 893
Melioidosis, 328

Index > 1501
Membrana nictitans, superficial gland of, 1185
Membrane-coating granules, 22
Meningioma, 1296
Menthol, antipruritic therapy with, 229- 230
Merial. See Fipronil.
Merkel cell tumorts), 1369-1370,1370
Merkel's cell(s), 10, 1369, 1371
functions of, 19
of tylotrich pad, 19, 20, 45, 46
ultrastructure of, 19, 21
Mesanagen, 46
Metabolic disease, 992-995. See also specific disorder.
Metabolic epidermal necrosis, 868
Metanagen, 46
Metaplasia, definition of, 174
Metatarsal fistulation, 980, 985-986, 986, 1157
Methimazole, adverse effects and side effects of, 723- 725
Methoprene, 426, 495, 498
Methotrexate, antiseborrheic effects of, 920
for graft-versus-host disease, 720
Methoxychlor flea and tick powders, 424
Methylene blue, 116
Methylprednisolone, injectable, 247t
Methylprednisolone acetate, 247, 250
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Methyltestosterone, for hypoandrogenism, 838
Meticorten. See Prednisone, injectable.
Metronidazole, for leishmaniasis, 538
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
Metyrapone, for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
Mexican hairless dog, 957, 958
MGK-264, 427
Mibolerone, 838
Miconazole, for Malassezia dermatitis, 219
shampoo, 223, 356t
topical, 356t, 409
Miconazole Spray. See Miconazole.
Microabscess(es), 149-151, 150, 151, 152
eosinophilic, 150, 151
papillary, 165
Microbial flora. See Microflora.
Microcirculation, cutaneous, measurement of, 57-58
Micrococcus spp., as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
in dogs, 33-34, 275
Microfibril(s), dermal, 37-38
Microflora, cutaneous, antagonism among, 33
interactions of, 33
synergism among, 33
epidermal hydration and, 32
nomadic, 33
normal, 274
fungi in, 338, 338t
in immune defense, 32-33
of ears, 1214t
of eyelids, 1185
resident, 33, 274-275
in cats, 33
transient, 33, 274-277
Micronychia, definition of, 1193t
MicroPearls sharnpoois), 917, 918, 1026-1027
Microscopy, direct smears for, 112, 113, 117
impression smears for, 112-115, 116-117
swab smears for, 115, 116
Microsporum spp., 336, 339
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
Microsporum audouinii, characteristics of, 339
in guinea pigs, 1430

Microsporum audouinii (Continued)
in rabbits, 1446
Wood's lamp examination for, 119,347-349
Microsporum canis, as resident flora, in cats, 33
cattery and multiple-cat household dermatophytosis
caused by, 358
prevention of, 361
response to treatment in, monitoring of, 361
characteristics of, 339
clinical management of, 234
in kittens only, 360-361
colonies of, morphology of, 122, 123
culture of, 120, 349
diagnostic criteria for, 122
environmental decontamination for, 359-360
enzymatic properties of, 341
examination for, 119, 120, 121
identification of, 122
in cats, 338
asymptomatic carriage of, 340-341
clinical findings in, 342, 343-347, 346
clinical management of, 409
experimental models of, 341
histopathology of, 349, 351, 352
hypersensitivity reaction to, 341-342
incidence of, 339
inflammatory response to, 341
in dogs, clinical findings in, 343, 344-345
histopathology of, 350
incidence of, 339
in guinea pigs, 1430-1431,1431
in humans, 347
in rabbits, 1446
macroconidia of, 122, 124
microscopic morphology of, 122, 124
transmission of, 339
vaccine against, 358
veterinary clinic as source of, 340
Wood's lamp examination for, 119, 121,347-349
Microsporum distortum, characteristics of, 339
Wood's lamp examination for, 119, 347-349
Microsporum gypseum, cattery and multiple-cat household
dermatophytosis caused by, 358
characteristics of, 339
colonies of, morphology of, 122, 123
conidia of, 121
diagnostic criteria for, 124
identification of, 122-124
in cats, incidence of, 339
in dogs, clinical findings in, 343, 344-345
incidence of, 339
in guinea pigs, 1430
in normal flora, 338
in rabbits, 1446
in veterinary clinic, 340
macroconidia of, 122, 124
microscopic morphology of, 122, 124
transmission of, 340
Microsporum persicolor, 340
characteristics of, 349
culture of, 349
examination for, 120
in cats, histopathology of, 349, 352
in dogs, clinical findings in, 342-343, 344-345
histopathology of, 352
spontaneous remission of, 354
Microsporum vanbreuseghemii, conidia of, 121

1502 • Index
Microtia, congenital, in Dachshund, 1231, 1232
Microvasculature, cutaneous, 56, 56-58, 57
deep plexus of, 56, 56
middle plexus of, 56, 56
superficial plexus of, 56, 56
Microvesicle(s), epidermal, 148, 148
Milbemycin, 428, 429, 445
for canine demodicosis, 472
for scabies, 483
regulation of, 424
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 429-430
Mineral(s), supplementation of, 209
Mineral imbalancets), 1119
Mineral oil, 227, 1028
Mineralization, dermal perifollicular, 168
dystrophic, of dermal collagen, 157-158,158
perifollicular, 43-44
Minoxidil, in canine alopecia, 874
Misoprostol, for canine atopy, 601
Mitaban. See Amitraz.
Mite(s). See also Storage mite-related hypersensitivity.
cat fur, skin scraping for, 101
Cheyletiella. See Cheyletiellosis.
chigger. See Trornbiculosis (chigger mites).
demodectic. See Demodicosis.
ear. See Ear miters) (Otodectes cynotis).
environmental, 453
harvest. See Trornbiculosis (chigger mites).
house dust, 453
on ferrets, 1419
on guinea pigs, 1431-1433, 1432-1434
on mice, 1443
on rabbits, 1448-1449
on rats, 1453
parasitic, 445-484
poultry, 445-446, 446
skin scraping for, 107
sarcoptic. See Scabies.
structure of, 440, 445
treatment of, 445
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD), adverse effects and side effects of,
812-813
hyperpigmentation caused by, 1011-1012
melanotrichia caused by, 1011,1012
therapy with, for adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome,
849-850
for adrenal neoplasia, 815
for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 812-814
for feline hyperadrenocorticism, 818
Mitotic figures, 134
Moisturizerls), 223, 1028
in topical therapy, 227
Moldis), 336, 337. See also FungusIJungi.
Molecular biology, 204
Moll's glandes), 1185
Monilia spp. See Candida spp ..
Moniliasis. See Candidiasis.
Moniliella suaveolens, 379
Monoclonal gammopathy, amyloidosis associated with, 768
Monokine(s),543
Mononuclear cells, in cytologic diagnosis, 117
Mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), 553
Morphea, 1142, 1146-1148,1147
Mortierella spp., 384
Mosquito bitets), 502
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline, 635-636, 637, 638
Mosquito dermatitis, 502-503
Mouse, alopecia areata in, 1444

Mouse (Continued)
bacterial infections in, 1442
barbering in, 1444
bite wounds in, 1444
cage-related injury in, 1442
dermatophytosis in, 1442-1443
dermatoses in, 1442-1444
ectoparasites on, 1432, 1435, 1443
fungal infections in, 1442-1443
hereditary hairlessness in, 1444
immune complex vasculitis in, 1444
neoplasia in, 1444
nutritional disorders in, 1443-1444
ringtail in, 1444
viral infection in, 1443
Mouse pox, 1443
Moxidectin, 428, 429
for canine demodicosis, 472
otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 430
Mucin, epidermal, 11
in dermis, 38
Mucinosis, cutaneous, 996-997, 1401, 1402, 1402
dermal, 164, 165
diffuse, 1402, 1402
focal, 1401, 1402
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
follicular. See Alopecia mucinosa.
hypersensitivity and, 1175
idiopathic, 1158, 1174-1175,1176-1177
in hypothyroidism, 783
Mucinous degeneration, dermal. See Mucinosis.
Mucocutaneous junction(s), common and less common
dermatoses of, 103t-l04t
Mucoid degeneration, dermal. See Mucinosis.
Mucor spp., 384
in normal flora, 338, 338t
Mucorales, 384
Mucormycosis, 377, 384
Mucous membrane pemphigoid, 694,695,701
Multinucleate epidermal giant cellts), 174-175, 175
Multinucleate histiocytic giant cellis), 147, 185-187, 186
foreign body-type, 185, 186
Langhans-type, 185, 186
Touton-type, 185-187, 186
Multinucleate keratinocyte giant cellis), 174-175, 175
Mumps, 524
Munro's microabscess, 150-151, 151
Munsterlander, large, black hair follicular dysplasia in,
962
Mupirocin, topical, for bacterial infection, 279, 280
Mural folliculitis. See Folliculitis, mural.
Musculoskeletal system, in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
Muzzle, bleeding from, 304
folliculitis of, 303-304
furunculosis of, 302, 303-304
surface markings of, 3
Mycelium, definition of, 336
Mycetoma, actinomycotic, definition of, 376
black (dark)-grained, 376, 377
definition of, 376
eumycotic, 377-379, 378
definition of, 376
granules in, 337
pododermatitis caused by, 305
white-grained, 376, 377
Mycetoma foot, 378
Mycobacteria, classification of, 312-313

Index • 1503
Mycobacteria (Continued)
granulomas caused by, 312-321, 317, 318, 320
leprosy, 312
opportunistic, 312-313, 319-321
tuberculosis, 312
Mycobacteriosis, and abscesses in cats, 311
atypical, 317
diagnosis of, 117, 125
Mycobacterium avium, 312, 315
Mycobacterium bovis, 314
Mycobacterium chelonei, 312, 317, 319
Mycobacterium chitae, 315
Mycobacterium fortuitum, 312, 317, 319
Mycobacterium kansasii, 312
Mycobacterium leprae, 316
Mycobacterium lepraemurium, 312, 315
in rats, 1452
Mycobacterium malmoense, 315
Mycobacterium marinum, 312
Mycobacterium phlei, 312, 319
Mycobacterium smegmatis, 312, 319
Mycobacterium thermoresistible, 312, 319
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 312, 314
Mycobacterium ulcerans, 312
Mycobacterium xenopi, 312, 319
Mycophenolate mofetil, and cyclosporine, combined, for
graft-versus-host disease, 720
Mycoplasma spp., in abscesses in cats, 311
infections caused by, 327
Mycoplasma-like bacteria (Lforrns), infections caused by,
327
Mycoptes musculinus, 1434-1435
in guinea pigs, 1433
in mice, 1443
Mycosis/mycoses. See also Fungal infection(s); Fungus/
fungi.
and abscesses in cats, 311
cytologic diagnosis of, 117
deep, 391-403
definition of, 391
diagnosis of, 118-119
definition of, 336
intermediate. See Mycosis/mycoses, subcutaneous.
subcutaneous, 337, 375-391
diagnosis of, 118-119
superficial, 337, 338-375
systemic therapy for, 356-358, 357t
topical therapy for, 354-356, 356t
systemic, 337, 391-403
therapy for, 354-358, 356t, 357t, 409-415
Mycosis fungoides, 1021,1324, 1331, 1333-1338,13341337
in hamsters, 1441
Mycostatin. See Nystatin.
Mycotoxin(s), 1101
Myelin basic protein, in cell type identification, 204t
Myiasis, 501, 503-505, 504
in rabbits, 1449
Myobia musculi, 1434-1435
on mice, 1443
on rats, 1453
Myoglobin, in cell type identification, 204t
Myospherulosis, 1096, 1097
Myringotomy, 1220
Myxedema, 783- 784, 853
dermal. See Mucinosis.
Myxedema coma, treatment of, 864
Myxoid degeneration, dermal. See Mucinosis.

Myxomais), 1289-1299

breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Myxomatosis, in rabbits, 1446, 1447
Myxosarcomats), 1281, 1289-1290,1292
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
claw involvement in, 1198

Naftifine, topical, 356t, 409
Naftin. See Naftifine.
Naloxone, 1057
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Naltrexone, 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
a-Naphthyl acetate esterase, in cell type identification, 204t
Narcan. See Naloxone.
Nasal furunculosis, 94
Nasal hyperkeratosis, 936
Nasal planum, common and less common dermatoses of,
103t
epidermis of, 26
histology of, 12
pigmented epithelium of, 16
Nasal solar dermatitis. See also Solar dermatitis.
canine, 1074-1077, 1075
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis, 1038-1041, 1039
Nasolabiogram(s),3
Nasopharyngeal polypts), feline, 1207-1208
Neck, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Necrobacillosis, in rabbits, 1445
Necrobiosis, definition of, 176
Necrobiosis lipoidica, in diabetic dogs, 868
Necrolysis, definition of, 136
toxic epidermal. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Necrolytic migratory erythema, 868-873
cause and pathogenesis of, 868-870
claw involvement in, 1199
clinical features of, 869, 870-871
clinical management of, 871-873
definition of, 868
diagnosis of, 871, 872
mycotoxin-related, 1101
paraneoplastic, 1375
Necrosis, and cell death, comparison of, 136-137
caseation, 136
coagulation, 136
definition of, 136
epidermal, 137-140, 141
fat, 172, 172
hyalinizing, 172
microcystic, 172, 172
mineralizing, 172
miscellaneous causes of, 1086, 1089, 1089-1090
Necrotizing fasciitis, staphylococcal, 324-325
streptococcal, 324
Nernatodets), filarial, 439
Neomycin, otic therapy with, 1227
topical, for bacterial infection, 280
Neomycin-polymyxin, otic therapy with, 1227
Neonicotinoidis), systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 430
Neoplasm(s). See also Tumor(s).
adrenal, 801, 846, 846
clinical management of, 810, 814-815
functional, 799
anal sac, 1202
ceruminal gland, 1196-1197, 1208, 1208-1209,1209
claw involvement in, 1196-1197, 1198
cytologic diagnosts of, 114, 117, 118t

1504 • Index
Neoplasm(s) (Continued)
cytomorphologic findings in, 117, 118t
ear, 1208
epithelial, 1239-1281
eyelid involvement in, 1188-1190,1189, 1190t
hypopigmentation caused by, 1008, 1021
in ferrets, 1420, 1427-1428
in gerbils, 1429-1430
in guinea pigs, 1432, 1439
in hamsters, 1432, 1441-1442,1442
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1451-1452
in rats, 1455
loss of heterozygosity in, 65
lymphohistiocytic, 1330-1357
lymphoreticular. See Lymphoma.
melanocytic, 1357-1364
mesenchymal, 1281-1304
pinnal, 1208
secondary, of skin, 1373-1375
surgical transplantation of, 1375
testicular, and skin, 838- 843
hyperandrogenism caused by, 834-836, 835-837
in ferrets, 1425
virus-related, 528
Neoral. See Cyclosporine.
Neospora caninum, 532-533
Neosporosis, canine, 532-533
Neotrombicula autumnalis, 447-448
Nervets), cutaneous, 58-63, 60, 61
Nestts), of dermal or epidermal cells, 174,174
Neural cell adhesion molecules (N-CAM), in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Neurilemoma. See Schwannoma.
Neurinoma. See Schwarlnoma.
Neurodermatitis, feline, 1066-1070
Neuroendocrine tumor(s), primary cutaneous, 1369-1370,
1370
Neurofibroma. See also Schwannoma.
in gerbils, 1430
Neurofibrosarcoma, claw involvement in, 1198
Neurofilament, in cell type identification, 204t
Neurohormonejs), 1055
Neuro-immuno-cutaneous-endocrine (NICE) network,
1055
Neuron-specific enolase, in cell type identification, 204t
Neuropeptide(s),59
in pruritus, 62t, 62-63
Neuroregulator(s), 1055
Neurothekeoma, 1294, 1294
Neurotransmitterts), 1055
Neurotrophinis), 59
Neutrophtlts), chemoattractants for, 557, 557t
cutaneous, 39
degenerate, and cytologic diagnosis, 113, 115, 118t
functions of, 556-557
in cytologic diagnosis, 117
in dermatitis, 187
nondegenerate, and cytologic diagnosis, 113, 114,
118t
products of, 557, 557t
Neutrophilic vasculitis, 181
Nevus/nevi, 1382-1390
adnexal (pilosebaceous), 1384-1386,1385
benign, loss of heterozygosity in, 65
collagenous, 1380-1381, 1382-1384,1384, 1385
breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
multiple, 986

Nevus/nevi (Continued)
renal pathology with, 1383
paraneoplastic, 1375
comedo, 1007, 1389, 1391
definition of, 177
epidermal, 1007, 1013,1380-1381, 1388-1389,
1389
breedis) with predilection for, 1238t
in dogs, 157
epithelial, 1013
epitrichial (apocrine) sweat gland, 1387, 1387, 1388
hair follicle, 1389, 1390
linear epidermal, claw involvement in, 1199
melanocytic, 1007, 1390, 1391, 1392
organoid, 1380-1381, 1384-1386, 1386
pacinian corpuscle, 1390
sebaceous gland, 1380-1381, 1386-1387,1387
vascular, 1380-1381, 1386
scrotal, 1386
breedis) with predilection for, 1238t
Newfoundland, callus dermatitis in, 1102
color dilution alopecia in, 967
demodicosis in, 465
hypopigmentation in, 1008-1009, 1021
hypothyroidism in, 852
idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of upper lip in, 1178
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
skin of, hydration of, 32
vitiligo in, 1015
Niacin, deficiency of, 1118-1119
in hamsters, 1441
in rats, 1453
Niacinamide. See Tetracycline and niacinamide.
Nictitans plasmacytic conjunctivitis, canine, treatment of,
674
Nidogen,36t
Nikolsky's sign, 88, 101
Nitenpyram, 430
Nitrogen, liquid, in cryosurgery, 257
Nitrous oxide, in cryosurgery, 257
Nizoral. See Ketoconazole.
Nocardia spp., in abscesses in cats, 311
Nocardia asteroides, 323
Nocardia brasiliensis, 323
Nocardia caviae, 323
Nocardia [arcinica, 323
Nocardia nova, 323
Nocardiosis, 323, 323-324, 324
and opportunistic (atypical) mycobacteriosis, co-infection
with, in cats, 320
diagnosis of, 125
in cats, 317
Nociceptcr(s), 61, 62
Nodular dermatitis. See Dermatitis, nodular.
Nodular dermatofibrosis, in German shepherd, 1380-1381,
1382-1383
Nodular fasciitis, 1290-1291
Nodulets), 87, 91
lymphoid, 174, 175
Nolvasan. See also Chlorhexidine diacetate.
shampoo, 917, 1035
Nonspecific enolase, in cell type identification, 204t
North American chigger. See Eutrombicula a/freddugesi.
Norwegian elkhound. See Elkhound, Norwegian.
Nose, dermatoses of, in gerbils, 1429, 1430
hyperkeratosis of, in canine distemper, 523, 523
hypopigmentation (depigmentation) of, 1016-1017

Index· 1505
Nose (Continued)
congenital, 1018
seasonal, 1017, 1018
surface markings of, 3
Notoedres cati, 476, 477, 483, 483-484. See also Scabies,
feline.
in rabbits, 1449
Notoedres muris, in guinea pigs, 1433
in mice, 1443
Novasome/s), 221, 222, 1027, 1028, 1035
Nuclear streaming, and cytologic diagnosis, 113
5' -Nucleotidase, in cell type identification, 204t
Nutrition, and canine seborrhea, 1032
and hair growth, 6
and skin, 207-210
Nutritional disorderts), claw involvement in, 1199
diagnosis of, 198
hair examination in, 108, 111
in chinchilla, 1417
in guinea pigs, 1434
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1443-1444
in rabbits, 1449
in rats, 1453-1454
Nutritional skin disease, 1112-1123
Nutritional supplernentts), 207, 1123
Nutritional therapy, 207
Nystatin, topical, 356t, 409
Nystatin/triamcinolone, topical, 356t

Oatmeal, colloidal, 230, 917, 1028
for pruritus, 228
topical therapy with, 236
Obsessive-compulsive disorder(s), 1064-1066
Ochratoxin A, 1101
Odlund bodyues), 22
Odontopsyllus multispinosus, on rabbits, 1449
Odoris), in haircoat, 214
Oil(s), animal, 227, 1028
hydrophilic, 226
hydrophobic, 226
vegetable, 227, 1028
Oil red 0 stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Oil rinsers), 212
Ointmentts), 218t, 224-225
Old English sheepdog. See Sheepdog, Old English.
Oleic acid, 208
Onchocerciasis, ocular, 439
Oncogene(s), 1239
Oncology, cutaneous, 1236-1239
Oncosis, definition of, 140
Onychalgia, definition of, 1193t
Onychauxis, definition of, 1193t
Onychia, definition of, 1193t
Onychitis. See Onychia.
Onychocryptosis, 1191
definition of, 1193t
Onychodystrophy, 1192, 1193, 1195
definition of, 1193t
idiopathic, 1191-1192, 1198
in hookworm dermatitis, 1195
lupoid, 745
symmetric, 1195-1198, 1196-1197
post-infectious, 1199
Onychogryposis (onychogryphosis), 1191, 1196
definition of, 1193t

Onychogryposis (onychogryphosis) (Continued)
in hookworm dermatitis, 1195
in leishmaniasis, 535, 535, 1195
Onycholysis, definition of, 1193t
Onychomadesis, 1189, 1193, 1196
clinical management of, 1200
definition of, 1193t
drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
idiopathic, 1196-1197, 1198-1199
Onychomalacia, 1191
definition of, 1193t
Onychomycosis, 1189, 1195
clinical management of, 1200
definition of, 1193t
in dermatophytosis, in cats, 343
in dogs, 343
Onychopathy, definition of, 1193t
Onychoptosis, definition of, 1193t
Onychorrhexis, 1191, 1195
clinical management of, 1200
definition of, 1193t
Onychoschisis, definition of, 1193t
Onychoschizia, 1192, 1195
clinical management of, 1200
definition of, 1193t
Onychosis, definition of, 1193t
Onyxis, definition of, 1193t
Oomycosis. See Pythiosis.
o,p'-DDD (rnitotane). See Mitotane (o,p'-DDD).
Optimmune. See Cyclosporine.
Oral cavity, common and less common dermatoses of, 103t
cryosurgery in, 258
Orbifloxacin, otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Orf,524
Organophosphate(s),499
for scabies, 482
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 428
topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 425
Oriental cat, psychogenic alopecia and dermatitis in, 1066
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
Ormetoprim-sulfadiazine, otic therapy with, 1229
Ormetoprim-sulfadimethoxine, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Ornithine decarboxylase, 29
Omithonyssus bacoti, on hamsters, 1440
on mice, 1443
on rats, 1453
Ortbokeratosis. See Hyperkeratosis, orthokeratotic (anuclear).
Ossification, cutaneous, in hyperadrenocorticism, 803, 803
Osteoma, 1314-1315, 1315-1316
Osteosarcoma, 1314-1315, 1316
claw involvement in, 1198
in rabbits, 1451
Otitis extema, 1204-1231. See also Earis).
allergic, 1210-1211, 1211
bacterial, 1210, 1213, 1214t
causes of, primary, 1206t, 1209-1213
secondary, 1206t-1207t, 1213-1215
ceruminous, 918, 1036, 1196
classification of, 1204, 1206t-1207t
clinical features of, 1217-1218
culture and susceptibility testing in, 1221
cytologic examination in, 1220
definition of, 1204
diagnosis of, 1219-1221
drug-induced, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t

1506 • Index
Otitis extema (Continued)
ear cleaning in, 1221-1225, 1222t, 1224
histopathology of, 1220-1221
hyperplastic, 1212
in dogs, cytologic diagnosis of, 115
in ferrets, 1419
in food hypersensitivity, 1211, 1213
in hypothyroidism, 1210-1211
in rabbits, 1448
inflammatory, idiopathic, 1212
Malassezia, 366
pathogenesis of, 364
otoscopic examination in, 1205, 1218-1219
parasitic, 1206t, 1209-1211
perpetuating factors in, 1207t, 1215-1217
physical findings in, 1211, 1218-1219
predisposing factors in, 1204-1209, 1206t
proliferative, 1210-1211
proliferative eosinophilic, canine, 1213
Pseudomonas, 1210-1211, 1213
surgery for, 1230-1231
systemic therapy for, 1229-1230
topical acquired irritant reactions causing, 1215
topical therapy for, 1225t-1227t, 1225-1229
treatment of, 1221-1231
yeast-related, 1213-1215
Otitis media, 1216-1217, 1217
bacterial, 1214t
culture and susceptibility testing in, 1221
Otoacariasis, in rabbits, 1448
Otobius megnini, 442-443, 443
Otomax. See Clotrirnazolelbetamethasone/gentamicin.
Otoscopic examination, in otitis extema, 1205, 1218-1219
Ovaban. See Megestrol acetate.
Ovoid bodyues). See Apoptotic body(ies).
Oxacillin, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
against Staphulococcus intermedius, 282
long-term therapy with, 287
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Oxidizing agent(s), topical, 231
OxyDex, 226, 231, 1027
Oxytalan fiberts), 38

Pachyonychia, definition of, 1193t
Pacific (West Coast) tick(s), 444
Pacini's corpuscle, innervation of, 59, 61, 61, 62
Paecilomqces[umosoroseus, 404
Paecilonujces lilacinus, 404
Paecilomycosis, 404, 405
Pagetoid reticulosis, 1021, 1331, 1339-1340, 1339-1341
Pain, assessment of, 83
Paint, in haircoat, 213
Panalog, 232, 502. See also Nystatin/triamcinolone.
Pancomulin, 28
Pancreas, cancer of, cutaneous metastases of, 1373
tumors of, 870
Pancreatitis, fatty acids and, 241
Panhypopituitarism, 782
Panniculitis, 91, 171-172, 196-197, 203, 1156-1162
cause and pathogenesis of, 1156-1157
clinical features of, 1157-1159
clinical management of, 1161-1162
cytologic diagnosts of, 117
definition of, 1156
diagnosis of, 1159-1161, 1160-1164

Panniculitis (Continued)
diffuse, definition of, 197
in dogs, 197
drug-induced, 729
in dogs, 725
in cats, 1158, 1159, 1160, 1162-1164
in dermatophytosis, 353
in dogs, 1157-1159,1158, 1161
in humans, differential diagnosis of, 1156, 1157t
in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
in vasculitis, 747
lobular, 196-197, 1162
lupus erythematosus, 197
nodular, 1157
pancreatic, 1160-1161
postinjection, 1160, 1163, 1164
pyogranulomatous, 377, 1161
sclerosing, 1164
septal, 197, 1160, 1163
in cats, 197
sterile, 203
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in cats, 175, 311
sterile pedal. See Focal metatarsal fistulation.
traumatic, 1160
Weber-Christian, 1157
Pansteatitis, in cats, 1117,1117-1118
Pantothenic acid, deficiency of, 1020
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1443
in rats, 1453
Papillae adiposae, 63, 64
Papillary squirting, 135, 173
Papillomats), 1239-1248
breed(s) with predtlection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1239-1240
clinical findings in, 1240-1244
clinical management of, 1248
cutaneous, in dogs, 1240, 1241
cutaneous exophytic, 1012
cutaneous inverted, in dogs, 1240, 1242
diagnosis of, 1244-1247, 1244-1247
differential diagnosis of, 1244-1246
fibrovascular, 1284, 1284, 1285
footpad, in dogs, 1241, 1242
in cats, 527, 530-531, 1243-1244
in dogs, 1240-1243,1241-1243
in gerbils, 1430
in hamsters, 1442
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1451
in rats, 1455
multiple, in dogs, 1241, 1243
pigmented, papular cutaneous, in dogs, 1240
of eyelid, 1188
Shope, in rabbits, 1451
squamous, inverted, 1198
Papillomatosis, dermal, 162
oral, canine, 1240, 1241
Papillomavirus antigen, in Bowen's disease, 1258
Papillomavirus infection, canine, 525-527, 530-531
detection of, 1239
feline, 527-528, 530-531, 1243-1244
pigmentary abnormalities with, 1012, 1013
Papillon, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
Papovavirustes), neoplasia caused by, 528
Papulets), 86, 88

Index v 1507
Parabens, in shampoo, 223
Paragonimus kellicotti, in dogs, 440
Parakeratosis. See Hyperkeratosis, parakeratotic (nucleated).
Parakeratotic capts), 133, 135
perivascular dermatitis with, 179
Paraneoplastic alopecia, 902, 903, 904
Paraneoplastic syndrome(s), 1375
Parapoxvirus infection, in cats, 524
in dogs, 524
Parapsoriasis, 1039, 1050-1051, 1051
Parasitic disease. See also specific parasite.
ear involvement in, 1206t, 1209-1211
intestinal, in ferrets, 1426
of claws, 1195
of skin, 423-507
diagnosis of, 101-107
pododermatitis caused by, 305
otitis externa in, 1206t, 1209-1211
Parasitic hypersensitivity, 627-644. See also Intestinal
parasite hypersensitivity; specific parasite.
Parlodel. See Bromocriptine mesylate.
Paronychia, 1022, 1193
bacterial, 1189
in cat with systemic lupus erythematosus, 696-697
demodectic, 1195
Malassezia, 366, 1189
Pastels), 225
Pasteurella multocida, in cats, in oral flora, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses, 310-311
Pasteurella pneumotropica, infection by, in hamsters,
1439
in mice, 1442
in rats, 1452
Pasteurellosis, in rabbits, 1444-1445
Patch, 86, 87
Pattern baldness, 890, 954, 963-964, 965-966, 966
clinical management of, 253
Pautrier microabscess, 151, 152, 1347
Pawls), common and less common dermatoses of, 105t
Paxillin, 22t
Peanut agglutinin, in cell type identification, 204t
Pedal folliculitis and furunculosis. See Pododermatitis.
Pediculosis, 487-490, 488
cause of, 487
clinical features of, 487-489, 488
definition of, 487
diagnosis of, 489
differential diagnosis of, 489
in cats, 490
in dogs, 490
pathogenesis of, 487
treatment of, 490
Pekingese, dermatophytosis in, 343
distichiasis in, 1188
drug reactions in, 721
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
follicular dysplasia in, 971
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
vaccine reaction in, 744
Pelodera dermatitis, 432-434, 434-436
in guinea pigs, 1433
in humans, 432

Pelodera strongyloides, 432, 434
in humans, 432
pododermatitis caused by, 305
Pemphigoid, bullous. See Bullous pemphigoid.
cicatricial. See Pemphigoid, mucous membrane.
mucous membrane, 694, 695, 701
Pemphigus, benign familial, canine, 947-948, 948
diet-induced, 680, 682
panepidermal pustular, 685, 686
prognosis for, 681
paraneoplastic, 693, 693t, 1375
diagnosis of, 671
pathomechanism of, 19
Pemphigus complex, 88, 678-693
cause of, 678-679
characteristics of, 678
clinical management of, 681-682
diagnosis of, 117, 669, 680-681
in cats and dogs, cause and pathogenesis of, 679-680
diagnosts of, 669, 680-681
in humans, 678-680
pathogenesis of, 678-680
prognosis for, 681
Pemphigus erythematosus, 688, 691, 691-693
diagnosis of, 669, 680, 691, 692, 692
in cats and dogs, 669, 680-681, 688-689
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
management of, 693
prognosis for, 681
Pemphigus foliaceus, 686-690
cause of, 680
claw involvement in, 1195, 1196
clinical features of, 683, 687, 688-689
diagnosis of, 671, 687-689, 689, 690, 691
differential diagnosis of, 687, 688-689
drug-induced, 729
in cats, 723t, 725, 726
in dogs, 687, 722t
in cats, 687-690, 688-689
in dogs, 199, 686-690, 688-689
chronic, disease-associated, 687
diagnosis of, 147, 155
spontaneous, 687
in humans, 678
incidence of, 686
management of, 689-690
prognosis for, 681
Pemphigus vegetans, 685-686, 685-686
clinical features of, 683
prognosis for, 681
Pemphigus vulgaris, claw involvement in, 1195
diagnosis of, 671
in cats, villi in, 163
in cats and dogs, 669, 679
clinical features of, 682, 683
clinical management of, 682-685
diagnosiS of, 682, 684
differential diagnosts of, 682
in humans, 678-679
prognosis for, 681
Penicillate nerve endings, 62
Penicillin(s), adverse effects and side effects of, 721
distribution of, in skin, 281
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Penicillium spp., as resident flora, in dogs, 34
colonies of, morphology of, 123
in normal flora, 338, 338t
Pentoxifylline, 601

1508 • Index
Pentoxifylline (Continued)
adverse effects and side effects of, 241
for dermatomyositis, 945-946
for pemphigus, 682
for vasculitis, 753- 754
formulations of, 241
indications for, 241
pharmacology of, 241
Peptide regulatory factoris), 543
Peptostreptococcus spp., cellulitis caused by, 310
in infections, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Perforating dermatitis, 1168-1170, 1169, 1170
Perform, 740
Periactin. See Cyproheptadine hydrochloride.
Perianal gland(s). See Circumanal (perianal) glands.
Pericytets). 57
Periderm, 2
Perifollicular fibrosis, 168, 169, 195
Perifollicular melanosis, 168, 169, 195
Perifolliculitis, 166, 192-196, 195
Periodic acid-Schiff stain, for fungi, 119
staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Perionychia, definition of 1193t
Peripheral nerve sheath tumor, 1292
Peritonitis, feline infectious, 522, 522
Perivascular dermatitis, deep, 178, 179
diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with, 178-179
drug-induced, 729
eosinophilic, 178
hyperplastic, 178, 180
pure, 178, 179
spongiotic, 178, 179-180
superficial, 178, 179
with parakeratotic caps, 179
Permethrin, 426-427, 502
for scabies, 482
spot application products, for flea control, 498
Persian cat, basal cell tumors in, 1261
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma in, 343-347
dermatophytosis in, 346, 347, 409
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
enilconazole therapy for, 410
epitrichial cysts in, 1381
facial fold intertrigo in, 1107
griseofulvin side effects in, 357
grooming for, 215
idiopathic facial dermatitis of, 920-921, 922
papillomavirus infection in, 527, 530-531
periocular dermatosis in, 1186
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
sebaceous gland tumors in, 1271
seborrhea in, 914-915, 920, 920, 921
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
yellow-eyed "smoky," Chedlak-Higasht syndrome in, 76,
977, 1014
Peruvian Inca Orchid dog, 957
Pesticideis), regulation of, 424
Petechiae, 87, 88
pH meter, 32
Phaeohyphomycosis, 367, 379-381, 380, 382
cycloheximide sensitivity in, 121
definition of, 376
pododermatitis caused by, 305
Phaeomelaninis), 1005
Phagocytosis, in cytologic diagnosis, 117

Pharyngeal carcinoma, cutaneous metastases of, 1366, 1373
Phenamidine, adverse effects and side effects of, 573
Phenobarbital, 1057
for acral lick dermatitis, 1061-1062
for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Phenolts), 680
contraindications to, in cats, 230
in shampoo, 223
in topical therapy, 230
Pheomelanin, 8, 16, 17
Phialemonium curvatum, 377
Phialemoniuni obovatum, 379
Phialooonidla, 337
Phialophora gougerotii. See Exopholia jeanselmei.
Phialophora verrucosa, 379
Phlebectasia, in hyperadrenocorticism, 800, 801, 804
Phlebotomus spp., 534
Phosmet, 425
Photocarcinogenesis, 24
Photochemotherapy, 237
Photodermatitis, 1073
Photodynamic therapy, for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
Photofrin-V,237
Photoimmunology, 24
Photoperiod, and cyclic follicular dysplasia, 890
and hairgrowth, 5-6
Photoprotection,236-237
for pemphigus erythematosus, 693
in discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
in pemphigus, 681-682
Photosensitivity, 1080
in cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
Photothermolysis, 259
Phthirus pubis, 487
Phycomycosis, 377. See also Pythiosis.
Physical examination, 84-94
dermatologic examination in, 85-86
general observation in, 84-85, 85
Physical therapy, 237-238
Phytogel, 263
Phytonutrientis), 209
Picric acid, 230
Piebaldism, 1014
Piedra, 374-375
black, 374
cause of, 374
clinical findings in, 374, 374
clinical management of, 375
diagnosis of, 374, 375
pathogenesis of, 374
white, 374, 374
Piedraia hortae, 374
Pigmentary incontinence, 162-163, 163
Pigmentation, abnorrnalityties) of, 87, 91, 900-911, 10051023. See also specific disorder.
congenital and hereditary, 975-978
terminology for, 1005, 1006t
androgens and, 796- 797
constitutive, 16
estrogens and, 795
facultative, 16
of hair, 1005
regulation of, 17
Pili torti, 953-955, 953-955
hair examination in, 112
Pilomatrixorna, 92, 1267-1269, 1269, 1270
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Pilonidal sinus. See Cyst(s), dermoid (dermoid sinus).

Index· 1509
Pilosebaceous follicle, 48
Pinkus corpuscle. See Tylotrich pad.
Pinna, acquired folding of, in cats, 1231, 1231
alopecia of, canine, 887, 888, 889
feline, 888, 900
dermatitis of, 1211
erythema of, drug-induced, in cats, 723t, 724-725, 1023
fly bites of, 1210-1211, 1211
in feline auricular chondritis, 748-749
lesions of, in vasculitis, 745
marginal necrosis in, in dog with systemic lupus erythematosus, 696-697
necrosis of, in ferrets, 1419
neoplasia of, 1208
proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of, 747-749, 748,
752,754
squamous cell carcinoma of, in white cats, 1241
in white-eared cats, 76
Pinnal folliculitis, sterile eosinophilic, canine, 1213
Pinnal-pedal reflex, in scabies, 479-480
Pinworm, in mice, 1444
in rats, 1454
Pit bull. See Terrier, Staffordshire.
Pit viperfs), 1090
Pituitary dwarfism, canine, 817, 819-822, 820
Pituitary gland. See Hypophysis.
Pityrosporurn spp.. See Malassezia spp ..
Pityrosporurn canis. See Malassezia pachudermatis.
Pityrosporurn ovale. See Malassezia furfur.
Pityrosporurn pachqdermatis. See Malassezia pachyderrnatis.
Plague, 325-326, 491
Plakoglobin, 20, 22t
Plakophilin, 20, 22t
Plaque/s), 86, 88
eosinophilic, feline, 1142, 1149-1152,1150-1152
multiple, pigmented, in dogs, 1240-1242, 1242, 1243
Plaquenil sulfate. See Hydroxychloroquine sulfate.
Plasma cellts), cutaneous, 39
in cytologic diagnosis, 118t
in nodular and diffuse dermatitis, 188, 188
Plasma cell pododermatitis, feline, 1126-1127, 1129-1130,
1130-1131
Plasmacytoma, 1334
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
cutaneous, 1342-1346
cause and pathogenesis of, 1342-1344
clinical findings in, 1334, 1344, 1344
clinical management of, 1346
diagnosls of, 1345, 1345-1346, 1346
in hamsters, 1442
Plasmacytosis, systemic, 1179-1180
Plasmapheresis, for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
Platelet-activating factor, 559-560
Platonychia, definition of, 1193t
Plectin, 13, 22t
Plesiotherapy, for actinic keratosis, 1079
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
Pneurnonyssoides caninutn, 452-453
Pododermatitis, 301, 304-306
autoimmune, 305
demodectic, 461
canine, 462, 465
fungal, 305
hookworm, 433
in dogs, 301, 344-345
Malassezia, rinses for, 410
parasitic, 305

Pododermatitis (Continued)
plasma cell, feline, 1126-1127, 1129-1130,1130-1131
tick-related, 435
ulcerative, in rabbits, 1445
Pointer, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
blastomycosis in, 392
callus dermatitis in, 1102
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
English, acral mutilation in, 988-989, 995
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
German shorthaired, acral mutilation in, 995
dermatophytosis in, 343
familial hypothyroidism in, 852
follicular dysplasia in, 971
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of, 180, 707, 717,941,
948-949, 949
hyperadrenocorticism in, 801
junctional epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
histoplasmosis in, 400
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 301, 303
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
wirehaired, follicular dysplasia in, 971
Polyethylene glycol, 226
Polyglandular syndrome(s), 782
Polyhydroxydine, 231
Polymerase chain reaction (peR), 1239
Polymyxin B, otic therapy with, 1227
topical, for bacterial infection, 280
Polyp(s), nasopharyngeal, 1196, 1207
Polyplax serrata, in mice, 1443
Polyplax spinulosa, on rats, 1453
Pomeranian, adrenal hyperplasia-Hke syndrome in, 846847
adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
follicular dysplasia in, 890
haircoat of, 8
hypogonadism in, 844-845
hypothyroidism in, 852
immunodeficiency in, 279t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
Poodle, adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
anal licking in, 1066
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
calcinosis circum scripta in, 1400
chlorambucil therapy in, side effects of, 673
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186
contact hypersensitivity in, 1081
dermal perifollicular mineralization in, 168
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
distichiasis in, 1188
drug reactions in, 721, 725
epiphora in, 1188, 1189
food hypersensitivity in, 618
glucocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1146
hair growth in, 5
haircoat of, 8
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
hypothyroldism in, 852
lymphedema in, 990
Malassezia dermatitis in, 348-349
melanotrichia in, 1010

1510 • Index
Poodle (Continued)
drug-induced, 1012
miniature, adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
anal sac disorders in, 1201
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958, 959, 960
delayed gonadal maturation in, 844
drug reactions in, 721
hypogonadism in, 833
melanocytic neoplasms in, 1359
pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia in, 820
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
panniculitis in, 1159
pilomatrixoma in, 1267
postvaccinal vasculitis in, 749, 749
psychogenic dermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 80t
sebaceous adenitis in, 242, 1029
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
standard, black, risk for neoplastic skin disorders and
non-neoplastic lumps in, 1237t
color dilution alopecia in, 967
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1143, 1143
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
sebaceous adenitis in, 925
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
toy, anal sac disorders in, 1201
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
hyperadrenocorticism in, 801
junctional epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
trichoblastoma in, 1270
vaccine reaction in, 744
Pore of Winer, dilated, 1254, 1265-1267, 1266, 1267
Poroconidia, 337
Porphyrorrwnas spp., cellulitis caused by, 310
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
Portuguese water dog, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971, 972,
973,974
pattern baldness in, 965
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Postclipping alopecia, 897, 898
Potassium iodide, antifungal therapy with, 414
Potassium permanganate, 227
Potbelly, in hyperadrenocorticism, 802, 804
Poultry miters), 445-446, 446
skin scraping for, 107
Povidone-iodine, 231
preoperative use of, 255
soaks, for bacterial infection, 280-281
topical, for bacterial infection, 279
Powderts), 218t, 224
Prairie dog(s), plague in, 325-326
Pramoxine, for pruritus, 228
in shampoo, 223
Praziquantel, injection reaction with, 902
Preauricular ulcerative dermatitis, idiopathic, of cats, 1177
Prednisolone, for dermatomyositis, 945
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma, 1139

Prednisolone (Continued)
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t
systemic, otic therapy with, 1229
Prednisone, for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma, 1139
for pemphigus, 681
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t
injectable, 247t
systemic, otic therapy with, 1229
Preen gland. See Tail gland, of dog.
Prelipoblast(s), 2
Pressure sorets). See Ulcer(s), decubital.
Prevotella spp., cellulitis caused by, 310
in infections, 276
Primidone, for feline psychogenic alopecia, 1070
Proanagen, 46
Procainamide, hypopigmentation caused by, 1020, 1020
Profilaggrin, 26-27
Progestagen(s), for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
therapy with, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
in pituitary dwarfism, 821-822
Progesterone, 797-798
blood levels of, assays for, 798
for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
repositol, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Program. See Lufeneron.
Proheart. See Moxidectin, systemic.
Prolactin, 798
levels of, melatonin and, 253
Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF), 781
Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF), 781
Proliferative eosinophilic otitis extema, canine, 1213
Propagule, fungal, 336
Propionibacterium spp., in hair follicle, 51
Propionibacterium acnes. See also 1mmunoregulin.
as resident flora, in dogs, 34, 275
Propylene glycol, 1028
topical, 230, 235
Prostaglandin(s), effects of, on skin, 208
Prostatic carcinoma, cutaneous metastases of, 1374, 1374
Protein, deficiency of, 207, 1115-1116
dietary, for cats, 1116
for dogs, 1116
Protein A, 275, 276
Proteoglycan(s), functions of, 38
major, 38
Proteus spp., in anal sacs, 1201
otitis extema caused by, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
Proteus mirabilis, as transient flora, in cats, 275
in dogs, 275
in generalized demodectic mange, 465
Prototheca spp., characteristics of, 404-405
Prototheca wickerhamii, 405, 406
Prototheca zopfii, 405
Protothecosis, 404-407
cause of, 404-405
clinical management of, 406-407
dtagnosls of, 406, 406, 407
in cats, 406
in dogs, 397, 405, 406, 407
pathogenesis of, 405
Protozoal diseasets), 531-538

Index· 1511
Prozac. See Fluoxetine.
Pruritus, 61-63, 228. See also Scabies.
and bacterial infection, 277, 286
assessment of, 83
clinical management of, in dogs, 239
drug-induced, in cats, 721, 723t
in dogs, 721, 722t
epicritic, 62
in feline leukemia virus dermatitis, 517
in folliculitis, 293
in hyperadrenocorticism, 804
in Malassezia dermatitis, 366
in pseudorabies, 524
mediators of, 62, 62t
modulators of, 62t, 62-63
neurogenic, in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, 996
paraneoplastic, 1375
perianal, in mice, 1444
protopathic, 62
Pruritus vulvae, in diabetic dogs, 868
Pseudoacanthosis, 134
Pseudoallescheria boydii, 377
culture of, 121
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
Pseudo-Cushing's syndrome. See Hyposomatotropism
(pseudo-Cushing's syndrome, GH-responsive dermatosis).
Pseudohom cysts, 156
Pseudohypothyroidism, 782
Pseudolymphoma, 184, 1340-1342, 1342, 1343
and lymphoma, differentiation of, histologic criteria for,
1341-1342, 1343t
insect bite, 192
Pseudomicrodochium suttonii, 379
Pseudomonas spp., as transient flora, in cats, 275
in dogs, 275
otitis extema caused by, 1210-1211, 1213, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, fluorescence of, 119
in generalized demodectic mange, 465
in rabbits, 1445
infection by, in rats, 1452
Pseudomycetoma, bacterial, 302, 311-312, 313, 376
diagnosis of, 125
in dogs, 302
dermatophytic, 343-347, 348, 349, 376
treatment of, 357-358
in dogs, 302
in mice, 1442
Pseudopelade, 765, 765-766, 766, 767, 907
Pseudopregnancy, 830, 833, 834
Pseudopyoderma(s),328
Pseudorabies, 524
Psorergates simplex, in mice, 1443
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis, of Springer spaniel,
929-931, 930-931, 933, 934
Psoroptes, 1434-1435
Psoroptes cuniculi, in rabbits, 1448
Psoroptes ovis, in rabbits, 1448
Psychocutaneous medicine, 1055
Psychodermatology, 1055
Psychogenic skin dtseasets), 1055-1071
acral lick dermatitis as. See Acral lick dermatitis.
canine, 1058-1066
feline, 1066-1071
Psychological drug therapy, 1056-1057
PTD lotion, 229t

Public health considerations, with blastomycosis, 394
with canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
with feline poxvirus, 522
with flea infestation, 491
with hookworm, 432
with Malassezia dermatitis, 366, 1215
with plague, 326
with sporotrichosis, 386-388, 387
Pug, atopy in, 581
distichiasis in, 1188
intertrigo in, facial fold, 1107
tail fold, 1107
lentiginosis profusa in, 1006
mast cell tumors in, 1320
multiple pigmented plaques in, 1240, 1242, 1242
papillomavirus-associated pigmentary abnormality in,
1012
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Pulex irritans, 491
Puli, grooming of, 214
Puppy strangles. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Purpura, 87, 100
Pustular dermatosis, linear IgA, canine, 748, 756, 756
sterile, cytologic diagnosis of, 117
subcomeal, canine. See Subcomeal pustular dermatosis.
Pustular mural folliculitis, 194, 199
Pustular pemphigus, panepiderma], 685, 686
prognosis for, 681
Pustulets), 86, 87, 89, 97
color of, 89
epidermal, 149-151,150, 151
intraepldermal, 190, 193t
location of, 89
nonfollicular, 89
size of, 89
spongiform (of Kogoj), 150, 150
subepidermal, 190, 193t
Pustulosis, sterile eosinophilic, 200
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
Pyknosis, definition of, 136
Pyoben, 231, 1027
Pyocyanin, 1445
Pyoderma. See also Demodicosis, in dogs.
bacterial, in dogs, 28, 277
recurrent, 286
in hypothyroidism, 853
callus, 328
callus dermatitis and, 1097, 1102-1103
deep, 298-324
German shepherd, 531
in hypothyroidism, 784
interdigital (pododermatitis). See Pododermatitis.
juvenile. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
mucocutaneous, 180,289, 290-291,291, 292
nasal, 301, 303
superficial, 288- 298
Pyogranuloma. See also Granuloma and pyogranuloma.
in rats, 1452
infectious, cytologlc diagnosis of, 113
perifollicular, 195
sterile, cytologic diagnosis of, 113
on feet, 305
Pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome, sterile, 189
Pyotraumatic dermatitis, 1097, 1104, 1104-1105
Pyotraumatic folliculitis, 288, 300-303, 301, 303
Pyrethrin(s), 423

1512 • Index
Pyrethrin(s) (Continued)
otic therapy with, 1227t, 1228
topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 426
Pyrethroidts), 423
topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 426-427
Pyridoxine, deficiency of, 1020, 1119
in guinea pigs, 1434
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1443-1444
in rats, 1453
Pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine, for canine neosporosis, 533
Pyriproxyfen, 426, 495, 498
Pythiosis, 377, 381-384
cause of, 381
clinical management of, 384
diagnosis of, 382-384, 383
in cats, clinical findings in, 382, 382
in dogs, clinical findings in, 367, 381-382,383
pathogenesis of, 381
Pythium gracile. See Pythium insidiosum.
Pythium insidiosum, 381

Quaternary ammonium compounds, 232
in shampoo, 223
Quinacrine hydrochloride, 678
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716

Rabbit, abscesses in, 1445
alopecia areata in, 1450-1451, 1452
alopecia in, congenital, 1450, 1450
aspergillosis in, 1446
bacterial infections in, 1444-1446
barbering in, 1450
cutaneous asthenia in, 1450, 1451
dermatophytosis in, 1446
dermatoses in, 1444-1452
miscellaneous, 1449-1451
drooling (slobbers) in, 1445
ectoparasites on, 1434, 1457, 1458-1459
facial eczema in, 1451
fleas on, 1449
flystrike in, 1449
frostbite in, 1447, 1450
fungal infections in, 1446, 1447
hair loss in, 1449-1450
hutch bum in, 1450
lice on, 1449
localized moist (sore dewlap) dermatitis in, 1445
lymphoma in, 1451, 1452
mites in, 1448-1449
myiasis in, 1449
myxomatosis in, 1446, 1447
necrobacillosis (Schmorl's disease) in, 1445
neoplasia in, 1451-1452
nutritional disorders in, 1449
pasteurellosis (snuffles) in, 1444-1445
psoroptic mange in, 1447, 1448
scent glands of, 1450
sebaceous adenitis in, 1451
self-mutilation in, 1450
Staphylococcus aureus in, 1445, 1446
ulcerative pododermatitis (sore hocks) in, 1445
venereal spirochetosis in, 1445-1446, 1447
viral infection in, 1446
Rabbit pox, 1446

Rabies vaccine, adverse effects of, 725, 743
focal cutaneous vasculitis and alopecia caused by, 749,
749, 752, 753, 754-756, 755
Radfordia affinis, in mice, 1443
Radfordia ensifera, in rats, 1453
Radiation injury, 1087-1088, 1088
Radiation therapy, 238
for acral lick dermatitis, 1064
for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 811, 814
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1257
Radiosurgery, 262-263
Radixin,20
Ratts), alopecia areata in, 1455
auricular chondritis in, 1454
bacterial infections in, 1452
cage-related injury in, 1452
dermatophytosis in, 1453
dermatoses of, 1452-1455
miscellaneous, 1454-1455
ectoparasites on, 1447, 1453
fleas on, 1453
fungal infections in, 1453
fur of, age-related changes in, 1455
leprosy in, 1452
lice on, 1453
mites on, 1453
neoplasia in, 1455
nutritional disorders in, 1453-1454
pinworm in, 1454
plague in, 325-326
ringtail in, 1454, 1455
sialodacryoadenitis in, 1447, 1453
skin of, scales on, 1455
systemic hair embolism in, 1454-1455
Trixacarus dicersus in, 1447
viral infections in, 1447, 1453
Rathke's cleft cyst, 819
Rat-tail, canine, 1141
Raynaud-like disease, in dogs, 1195
Red hair, acquired, 1022
Red kelpi, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
Red mange. See Demodicosis, in dogs.
Red-legged widow spider, 484
Refsum disease, 31
Regulin(s), secretory, 543
Relapsing polychondritis, 759
Relief, antipruritic therapy with, 228, 229t
Reovirus infection, in mice, 1443
Hepellentts), flea, 499-500
fly, 502
topical, antiparasitic therapy with, 427
Reserve cells, 48
Resihist, 229
Resiprox, antipruritic therapy with, 229t
Resmethrin, 426
Resocortol butyrate, adrenocortical suppression by, 232
Resorcinol, 230
Respiratory rate, in thermoregulation, 54
Rete ridges, 10-13, 134-135, 138
Reticular degeneration, epidermal, 142, 145
Reticulin, 36
Reticulum cell tumor, transmissible. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Retin-A. See Vitamin A (retinol, retinoic acid, Retin-A).
Retinal, 241-242, 1028-1029
Retinoic acid, 234, 241-242, 1028-1029. See also Vitamin
A (retinol, retinoic acid, Retin-A).

Index • 1513
Retinoic acid (Continued)
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919
for actinic keratosis, 1079
for epidermal dysplasia in West Highland white terriers,
929
Retinoid(s), antiseborrheic therapy with, 1028
inverse agonist, 242
synthetic, 234, 1028
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 1146
in systemic therapy, 241-243
teratogenicity of, 1029
topical, 234
Retinol, 1028-1029. See also Vitamin A (retinol, retinoic
acid, Retin-A).
antiseborrheic therapy with, 919
therapy with, 1036
Retriever, Chesapeake Bay, follicular dysplasia in, 971
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
curly coated, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
curly-coated, risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in,
78t
flatcoated, histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 1352
Golden, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
atopy in, 581
benign fibrous histiocytoma in, 1354
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
fibromas in, 1282
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
food hypersensitivity in, 618
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
graying in, 1015
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 1352
hypothyroidism in, 852
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in,
1136
juvenile cellulitis in, 1158, 1165
lymphornasin,1331
malignant histiocytosis in, 1346
mast cell tumors in, 1320
melanocytic nevus in, 1390
melanocytoma in, 1359
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
multiple collagenous cysts in, and renal pathology,
1383
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
pododermatitis in, 305
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 79t
seborrhea in, 243, 1029
snow nose in, 1017
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
trichoptilosis in, 895, 950
trichorrhexis nodosa in, 950
vascular nevi in, 1386
Labrador, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
alopecia mucinosa in, 899
atopy in, 581
black, risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic lumps in, 1237t
waterline disease of, 1175-1176, 1178
blastomycosis in, 392
calcinosis cutis in, 1399, 1399
chondroma in, 1315
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958

Labrador (Continued)
cyclic follicular dysplasia in, 890
dermal melanocytes of, 39
eosinophilic dermatitis and edema in, 1155-1156
fibrovascular papillomas in, 1284
follicular dysplasta in, 971
food hypersensitivity in, 618, 1211
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
graying in, 1015
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1352
histiocytomas in, 1347
idiopathic leukotrichia in, 1021, 1021
lipomas in, 1308
lymphedema in, 990
mast cell tumors in, 1320
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
nasal hyperkeratosis in, 936
otitis externa in, 1212
pemphigus foliaceus in, 687
pododermatitis in, 305
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
seborrhea in, 913, 915, 1032
skin pH in, 3
snow nose in, 1017
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
sweating in, 53
vascular nevi in, 1386
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1036
yellow, nasal depigmentation in, 1017
photosensitivity in, 1080
supranumery claws in, 1197, 1199
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Reverse blot hybridization, 1239
Reverse T:J , 782- 783
measurement of, 784- 786
Revolution. See Selamectin.
Rex cat, 9
Cornish, follicular dysplasia in, 905, 971
dermatophytosis in, 347
Devon, congenital hypotrichosis in, 959
grooming for, 215
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
Rhabditic dermatitis. See Pelodera dermatitis.
Rhabdomyoma, 1313-1314
Rhabdomyosarcoma, 1281, 1313-1314
Rhinosporidiosis, 390-391
Rhinosporidium seeberi, 390
Rhinotracheitis infection, feline, 518, 524-525, 526-529
Rhipicephalus sanguineus, 443-444, 444, 445
Rhizopus spp., 384
in normal flora, of dogs, 338, 338t
Rhodesian Ridgeback, coat color dilution and cerebellar
degeneration in, 978
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936-937, 937, 1478
follicular dysplasia in, 971
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
trachyonychia in, 1199
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
Rhodococcus (Corynebacterium) equi, in abscesses in cats,
311

1514 • Index
Bhodotorula spp., dermatitis caused by, 37.5, 376
in normal flora, of cats, 338, 338t
Bhodotorula mucilaginosa, 37.5
Riboflavin, deficiency of, 1118
in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1443
in rats, 14.53
Rice paddy itch, 436
Rickettsia felis, 493
Rickettsia rickettsii, .528-.529
Rickettsia typhi, 493
Rickettsial diseasets), .528-.531
Ridaura. See Auranojin.
Rifampicin, systemic, dosage of, 284t
Hifampin, and f3-lactamase-resistant antibiotic, co-administration of, 283
skin color change caused by, 1023
Rimadyl. See Carprofen.
Ringtail, in hamsters, 1441
in mice, 1444
in rats, 14.54, 1455
Ringworm. See Dermatophytosis.
Hinsets), 214
antifungal, 3.56, 3.56t, 410
conditioning, 211
cream, flea, 498-499
formulations of, and efficacy of active ingredients, 218t,
224
oil, 212
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 444
canine, .528-.529, 530-531
Rocky Mountain wood tick(s), 444
Rod(s), identification of, 116
Hodentts), dermatophytes transmitted by, 339-340
plague in, 32.5-326
poxvirus carriage by, .520
Rodent ulcer. See Indolent ulcer, feline.
Roferon-A, 2.53
Rompun. See Xylasine.
Rotenone, antiparasitic therapy with, 427
for feline demodicosis, 47.5
otic therapy with, 1227t, 1228
Rottweiler, alopecia areata in, 763
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
congenital hypotrichosis in, 9.58
follicular dysplasia in, 971
follicular lipidosis in, 899, 899, 900, 973-974
follicular parakeratosis in, 92.5, 926, 927
haircoat of, 7
histiocytic sarcoma in, 1346-1347, 13.52
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypopigmentation in, 975
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
idiopathic onychomadesis in, 1196, 1198
immunodeficiency in, 278
leukoderma and leukotrichia in, 96
lupoid onychodystrophy in, 119.5
malignant histiocytosis in, 1346
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1018
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
snake bites in, 1091
vasculitis in, 744
vitiligo in, 1008-1009, 1015
Round bodyues), 138
Ruffini corpuscleis), innervation of, 61, 62

Ruffini's end-bulb. See Meissner's corpuscle.
Russell bodyties), 188-189
Russian blue cat, grooming for, 21.5

S100 protein, in cell type identification, 204t
Sabouraud's dextrose agar, 349
fungal culture in, 121-122, 123
Safflower oil, 209, 224, 227, 1028
St. Bernard, callus dermatitis in, 1102
demodicosis in, 465
distichiasis in, 1188
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
hypothyroidism in, 854
idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis of upper lip in, 1178
lip fold intertrigo in, 1107
lymphomas in, 1331
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8lt
St. Louis encephalitis, 444
Salicylic acid, antiseborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027,
1036
Saliva, in thermoregulation, in cats, 54
Salivary gland tumons), 1281
SALT (skin-associated lymphoid tissue). See Skin-associated lymphoid tissue.
Salt-split skin, 694
Saluki, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
color dilution alopecia in, 967
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
Samoyed, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome in, 847
adult-onset hyposomatotropism in, 822
follicular dysplasia in, 890
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1143
hypogonadism in, 844-84.5
ivermectin sensitivity in, 428
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 8lt
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 757
San Joaquin Valley fever. See Coccidioidomycosis.
Sandflies, .534
Sandimmune. See Cyclosporine.
Sarcocystosis, canine, 533-.534
Sarcoid, feline, 1285, 1288, 1289
Sarcomars), 1282
epithelioid, 1371-1373, 1372, 1373
fibroblastic spindle cell. See Fibrosarcoma(s).
histiocytic, 1346-1347, 1351-13.52
disseminated, 1347
localized, 1347
infectious. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
postvaccinal, 1317-1319,1318
reticulum cell. See Lymphoma.
soft tissue, 1281
undifferentiated, 1281, 1319-1320. See also Neuroendocrine tumoris), primary cutaneous.
Sarcophaga spp., 501, 504
Sarcophagids, 503
Sarcoptes scabiei, 481
in guinea pigs, 1433
in hamsters, 1440
in mice, 1443

Index' ISIS
Sarcoptes scabiei (Continued)
in rats, 1453
var. canis, 476, 477
var. cuniculi, in rabbits, 1448
Sarcoptic mange. See Scabies.
Sarcoptic mite(s). See Scabies.
Satellite cellfs), apoptosis of, 137, 141
necrosis of, 137
Satellitosis, 137, 141
Scabies, 98
canine, 466, 476-483, 478
cause of, 476-477
clinical features of, 466, 478, 479, 480
diagnosis of, 148, 479-481,481-482
pathogenesis of, 476-479
skin scraping for, 106
treatment of, 481-483
feline, 477, 478, 48~ 483-484
cause of, 476, 483
clinical features of, 478, 484
diagnosis of, 484, 485
pathogenesis of, 483-484
skin scraping for, 106
treatment of, 484
in foxes, 477
in humans, 477, 478, 479, 483
skin scraping for, 101
Scale, 87, 93
Scaling, 86
in bacterial infection, 277
orthokeratotic, 86
Scarfs), 87, 97, 196
Scarlet red stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Schipperke, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
color dilution alopecia in, 967
pemphigus foliaceus in, 686-687
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 8It
Schistosoma dermatitis, 436
Schistosomiasis, 436-437
in humans, 436-437
Schmorl's disease, in rabbits, 1445
Schnauzer, giant, congenital hypothyroidism in, 852
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 893
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
vitiligo in, 1015
hair growth in, 5
miniature, atopy in, 581
aurotrichia in, 978, 1008-1009, 1022
comedo syndrome in. See Schnauzer comedo syndrome.
drug reactions in, 721
epidermal nevi in, 1389
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
food hypersensitivity in, 618
gilding syndrome in, 978
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypothyroidism in, 852
lipomas in, 1308
melanocytic neoplasms in, 1359
melanocytoma in, 1359
melanoma in, 1361
multiple pigmented plaques in, 1240, 1242
Mycobacterium avium infection in, 315
papillomavirus-associated pigmentary abnormality in,
1012

Schnauzer (Continued)
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 81t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840, 843
skin pH in, 3
superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of, 720,
721,724-725, 729, 730
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1036
standard, melanoma in, 1361
Schnauzer comedo syndrome, 227, 242, 930, 931-935,
934, 1029, 1389
Schwannoma, 1281,1286, 1291-1294,1292-1293
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
Scleroderma, localized, canine, 1142, 1146-1148,1147
Sclerosis, dermal, 161-162
Scolecobasidium humicola, 379
Scopulariopsis spp., in normal flora, of cats, 338, 338t
Scottish terrier. See Terrier, Scottish.
Scraping(s). See Skin scraping.
Screwworm(s),503
Scrotum, skin of, histology of, 14, 36
varicose tumors of, 1386
vascular hamartoma of, 1386
vascular nevi of, 1386
Sealyham terrier. See Terrier, Sealyham.
Seasonal flank alopecia, 890-893, 891, 892
Sebaceous adenitis, 95, 168, 925, 1029
clinical management of, 242, 243
granulomatous, 199, 1140-1146
cause and pathogenesis of, 1141
clinical features of, 1141-1144
clinical management of, 1145-1146
diagnosis of, 1143-1145, 1144-1145
in cats, 1142, 1144
in dogs, 1141-1143, 1142, 1143
in rabbits, 1451
Sebaceous gland(s), 2, 41, 42, 43, 48-51, 50
adenomas of, 1029
clinical management of, 242
in dogs, 1271, 1272
in gerbils, 1429-1430
age-related changes in, 65
androgens and, 797
atrophy of, 168, 170, 170
carcinoma of, diagnosis of, 1274, 1274
in dogs, 1271
cysts of, 1381
disorder of, in guinea pigs, 1437-1439
distribution of, 48
dysplasia of, 168-170
enzymes in, 51
epithelioma of, diagnosis of, 1274, 1274
functions of, 48
hyperplasia of, 168-170, 1029
clinical management of, 242
in dogs, 1254, 1271
in eyelid, 1188, 1189
with greasy skin and haircoat, idiopathic, 1179, 1180
in dogs, atrophic, 168, 170
normal, 170
innervation of, 59
melanosis of, 152, 153, 170
nevi of, 1380-1381, 1386-1387,1387
regulation of, 51

1S16 • Index
Sebaceous gland(s) (Continued)
tumors of, 1270-1275
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1270
clinical findings in, 1271-1273
clinical management of, 1275
diagnosis of, 1273, 1273-1275, 1274
in cats, 1271-1273
in dogs, 1254, 1271, 1272
in mice, 1444
in rats, 1455
Seba-Hex. See Chlorhexidine, shampoo.
SebaLyt, 1026
Sebolux, 1026, 1028
Seborrhea, 93
and bacterial infection, 277
canine, 208-209, 235, 1030-1036, 1031. See also Demodicosis, in dogs.
cause and pathogenesis of, 1032
clinical features of, 1032
clinical management of, 1035-1036
diagnosis of, 1034, 1034-1035
endocrine factors and, 1032
environmental factors and, 1032
in inflammation, 1032
nutritional factors and, 1032
primary, 227, 913-920, 1030-1032
breed(s) with predilection for, 75, 227
cause and pathogenesis of, 913-915
clinical features of, 914, 915
clinical management of, 916-920
definition of, 913
diagnosis of, 915-916, 916-917
secondary, 227, 1030-1032, 1033
feline, 1008, 1038, 1039, 1040
primary, 914, 920, 921
Seborrhea oleosa, 228, 1026
in cats, 1038, 1039
in dogs, 1030
Seborrhea sicca, 208, 228, 1026
in cats, 1038, 1040
in dogs, 1030
Seborrheic dermatitis, diagnosis of, 151
SeboRx, 1026
Sebum, and acne, 1041
components of, 51
functions of, 48, 51
Secretory component, 31
Selamectin, 428, 498
otic therapy with, 1229
regulation of, 424
systemic, antiparasitic therapy with, 430
Selectints), 545
in vascular endothelium, 56
Selective IgA deficiency, 278, 279t
Selective IgM deficiency, 279t
Selenium sulfide shampoo, 223
antifungal therapy with, 409-410
antiseborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027, 1036
Self-destructive behavior, 1055, 1057
Self-mutilation, in rabbits, 1550
Self-nursing, 1065-1066
Seminomats), 838, 843
Sensory perception, 59-61
age-related changes in, 65
Serglycin, 38
Sertoli's cell tumor, 830, 838, 840-843, 841, 842, 843
red hair with, 1022

Sesame oil, 227, 1028
Setter, callus dermatitis in, 1102
English, atopy in, 581
benign familial pemphigus in, 947
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
idiopathic acquired cutaneous laxity in, 1173
M alassezia dermatitis in, 365
multiple pigmented plaques in, 1240-1242
Gordon, atopy in, 581
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
juvenile cellulitis in, 1165
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1036
Irish, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
antithyroglobulin antibodyties) in, 852
antithyroid antibodyiies) in, 789
atopy in, 581
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
epidermis of, turnover time for, 31
estrogen-responsive dermatosis in, 830
graying in, 1015
hemangiopeIicytoma in, 1402
hypothyroidism in, 852, 853
lymphomas in, 1331
melanocytoma in, 1359
melanoma in, 1361
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
pododermatitis in, 305
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 79t
seborrhea in, 227, 243, 913, 915, 1029, 1032
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
Sex, and risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders, 76
Sex hormoneis), 795-798. See also specific hormone.
Sex hormone ACTH response test, 798
Sex hormone dermatosis, 827-851, 1020
Sex hormone function testis), 798
Sezary syndrome, 1331, 1338, 1339
Shampoo(s),211-212
adverse reaction to, in miniature Schnauzers, 721
antibacterial, 223, 280
antifungal, 356, 356t, 409-410
anti-inflammatory agents in, 223-224
antimycotic, 223, 918
antiparasite, 223
antipruritic agents in, 223-224
antiseborrheic, 223, 916-918, 1026-1027, 1035-1036
carbaryl, for feline demodicosis, 475
contact time for, 222, 223
detergent, 211
flea, 498-499
formulations of, and efficacy of active ingredients, 218t,
221-224,222
medicated, use of, 223
microvesicle technology for, 221, 222
moistuIizing hypoallergenic, 917
soap, 211
Shar Pei, amyloidosis in, 767
atopy in, 581
body fold intertrigo in, 1106, 1107
demodicosis in, 461
dermal mucin of, 38
dermal mucinosis in, 164, 165
food hypersensitivity in, 618
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypothyroidism in, 852

Index· 1517
Shar Pei (Continued)
mast cell tumors in, 1320-1321
mucinosis in, 996-997, 1158, 1174-1175,1176-1177,
1401, 1402
multiple pigmented plaques in, 1242, 1243
oral papillomatosis in, 1240
otitis extema in, 1207
papillomas in, 1243, 1247
papillomavirus-associated pigmentary abnormality in,
1012
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8It
seborrhea in, 913, 915, 1032
skin scraping from, 105
superficial bacterial folliculitis in, 289, 293
Shedding, 8, 210
excessive, 894
in ferrets, 1425
in guinea pigs, 1437
seasonal, 6
Sheepdog, Belgian (Belgian Tervuren), atopy in, 581
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1146
hypopigmentation in, 975
lymphedema in, 990
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
vitiligo in, 1015
Old English, antithyroglobulin antibodyties) in, 852
demodicosis in, 465
drug reactions in, 721
grooming of, 214
hair growth in, 5
hypothyroidism in, 852
ivermectin contraindicated in, 1229
keratoacanthoma in, 1241, 1248
melanotrichia in, 1010
pilomatrixoma in, 1267
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 80t
vitiligo in, 1015
Shetland (sheltie), basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
bullous pemphigoid in, 695
color dilution alopecia in, 967
cutaneous histiocytosis in, 1353
dermatomyositis in, 938, 940, 942
distichiasis in, 1188
drug reactions in, 721
epidermolysis bullosa simplex in, 938
fly bites on, 502
follicular dysplasia in, 971
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypothyroidism in, 852
idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of, 707, 717, 946-947
ivermectin contraindicated in, 1229
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8It
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
superficial bacterial folliculitis in, 294
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
Sheltie. See Sheepdog, Shetland (Sheltie).
Shepherd, Australian, drug reactions in, 721
follicular dysplasia in, 971
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
Belgian, congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
Garafino, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982

Shepherd (Continued)
German, acral lick dermatitis in, 1058
amyloidosis in, 769
anal sac disorders in, 1201
calcinosis circum scripta in, 1400
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
chondrosarcomas in, 1315
chronic ulcerative blepharitis in, 1186
collagen disorder of footpads in, 980, 984, 984, 985
color dilution alopecia in, 967
congenital hypothyroidism in, 852
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
contact hypersensitivity in, 1081
delayed growth in, 820
dermatomyositis in, 940
dermatophytosis in, 344-345
distichiasis in, 1188
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
familial vasculopathy of, 189, 749-751, 987
fibropruritic nodule in, 1284
fly dermatitis in, 501
focal metatarsal fistulation of, 980, 985-986, 986
follicular dysplasia in, 971
folliculitis, furunculosis, and cellulitis in, 301, 306-308
food hypersensitivity in, 618
furunculosis in, 301
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1143
graying in, 1014-1015,1015
hair color of, 8
haircoat of, 7
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
hypopigmentation in, 975
hypopituitarism in, 811
idiopathic onychomadesis in, 1198-1199
IGF-l plasma levels in. See Xylasine.
immunodeficiency in, 307, 308
ivermectin sensitivity in, 428
keratoacanthoma in, 1248
lupoid onychodystrophy in, 1195
lymphedema in, 990
lymphomas in, 1331
medullary trichomalacia in, 895, 951
mucocutaneous pyoderma in, 290-291, 291
multiple collagenous nevi (nodular dermatofibrosis) in,
986,1380-1381, 1382-1383
myxomas and myxosarcomas in, 1290
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 303
pemphigus erythematosus in, 690
pituitary dwarfism in, 819, 820
pododermatitis in, 305
psychogenic dermatoses in, 305, 1056
pyoderma of, 278, 531
pyotraumatic dermatitis in, 1104
pythiosis in, 381
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 78t-79t
seborrhea in, 913, 1032
seminoma in, 843
snake bites in, 1091
sweating in, 53
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
tyrosinemia in, 994
vasculitis in, 744
vitiligo in, 1015
white, nasal depigmentation in, 1017

1518 • Index
Shepherd (Continued)
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1120
multiple collagenous cysts in, and renal pathology,
1383
Old English, lymphedema in, 990
Shetland sheepdog. See Sheepdog, Shetland (Sheltie).
Shiba inu, atopy in, 581
Shih tzu, atopy in, 581
distichiasis in, 1188
glucocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 8lt
Shivering, in thermoregulation, 54
Shope Hhromais), in rabbits, 1451-1452
Shope fibroma virus, 1446, 1451
Shope papillomars), in rabbits, 1451
Shope papilloma virus, 1446, 1451
Short hair syndrome of silky breeds, 888, 897
Shorthaired catis), American, grooming for, 215
domestic, grooming for, 215
double coat, 215
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in, 939
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
exotic, seborrhea in, 920
single coat, 215
Sialodacryoadenitis, in mice, 1443
in rabbits, 1447
in rats, 1447, 1453
Siamese cat, acromelanism in, 1012-1013
Aguirre's syndrome in, 1021
amyloidosis in, 767
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
basal cell tumors in, 1261
congenital hypotrichosis in, 959, 962
cryptococcosis in, 395
demodicosis in, 474
dermatophytosis in, 346
griseofulvin side effects in, 357
grooming for, 215
hair color of, 8
junctional epidermolysis bullosa in, 9.39
lipomas in, 1308
mast cell tumors in, 1322-1323
Mycobacterium avium infection in, 315
periocular leukotrichia in, 1021, 1022
photosensitivity in, 1080
pinnal alopecia in, 888, 900
psychogenic dermatoses in, 1056, 1066-1067
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 8lt
staphylococcal folliculitis in, 289
systemic lupus erythematosus in, 705
tail sucking in, 1070, 1070-1071
urticaria pigmentosa in, 997-998
vitiligo in, 1015, 1016
Siberian husky, alopecia in, 888
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
calcinosis cutis in, 1399
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
eosinophilic granuloma in, 1154, 1155
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 970, 971
follicular parakeratosis in, 925
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
hookworm dermatitis in, 432
hypogonadism in, 844

Siberian husky (Continued)
hypothyroidism in, 1120
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
mucocutaneous hypopigmentation in, 1017-1018
nasal depigmentation in, 1017
postclipping alopecia in, 897
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8lt
snow nose in, 1017
uveodermatologic syndrome in, 757
zinc-responsive dermatosis in, 1114-1115, 1119, 1121,
1121
Siliconeis), 1028
Silky terrier. See Terrier, Silky.
Silver nitrate, 227
Silver saltts), 232
Silver sulfadiazine, 232
Simuliulae spp., 502
Sinequan. See Doxepin.
Sinus hairs (vibrissae, whiskers), 44-45, 45
mechanoreceptors and, 61
Sinus pad, 45, 45
Skin, acidity of, antimicrobial effects of, 31-32
cleaning of, 210-213
color of, drug-induced changes in, 1023
dryness of, 1025
ecology of, 31-34. See also Microflora.
embryonic, 2
examination of, 85-86
general functions of, 1-2
greasy, with sebaceous gland hyperplasia, idiopathic,
1179,1180
gross anatomy of, 3-9
hydration of, in immune defense, 32
measurement of, 32
immunologic functions of, 25-26, 274. See also Skin
immune system.
metabolism of, 3
microscopic anatomy of, 9-65
pH of, and antimicrobial susceptibility, 282
in immune defense, 31-32
measurement of, 32
physiology of, 3-9
properties of, 1- 2
thickness of, 3
Skin appendage(s), formation of, 2-3
Skin biopsy. See Biopsy.
Skin care, normal, 207-215. See also Grooming.
Skin extensibility index, 982
Skin fold dermatitis. See Intertrigo.
Skin immune system, 549-561
adhesion molecules in, 545, 549t
aging and, 560-561
basophils in, 558
cell surface antigens (determinants) in, nomenclature for,
543-549, 544t-545t
cell surface receptors in, nomenclature for, 543-549
complement in, 559
cytokines and, 543-545, 546t
definition of, 549
eicosanoids and, 559-560, 56lt
endothelial cells in, 556
eosinophils in, 557-558
granulocytes in, 556
humoral components of, 558-560
immune complexes in, 559
keratinocytes in, 550-551

Index· 1519
Skin immune system (Continued)
Langerhans' cells in, 551-552
lipid mediators in, 559-560
lymphocytes in, 552-553
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and, 545-548
mast cells in, 553-556, 554
neutrophils in, 556-557
platelet-activating factor in, 559-560
tissue macrophages in, 553
Skin lesionts), annular, 88-89, 102
arciform, 102
asymmetric, 84, 85
bilaterally symmetric, 84, 85
coalescing, 89
configuration of, 88-89, 102
diffuse, 88
distribution of, 90- 93, 103t -105t
grouped, 102
iris (central healing, target), 102
linear, 88, 98, 102
morphology of, 86-88, 87-101
polycyclic, 102
primary, 86-87, 87-92
primary ancl!or secondary, 86, 87,92-96
secondary, 86, 87, 97-100
serpiginous, 102
single, 102
stages of, 89-90, 178
Skin scraping, 101-107, 115
Skin surgery. See Surgery.
Skin-associated lymphoid tissue, 26, 548-549
Skin-So-Soft, 427, 499
Skunk odor, removal of, 214
Sloughing, tissue, miscellaneous causes of, 1086, 1089,
1089-1090
Snake bite, 1090-1091, 1092
Snow nose, 1017, 1018
Snuffles, in rabbits, 1444-1445
Soakts), for bacterial infection, 280-281
Sodium borate, 495
Sodium hypochlorite, in topical therapy, 231
Sodium lactate, 235, 1028
Solar dermatitis, 1029, 1073-1081
canine, nasal, 1074-1077, 1075
of trunk and extremities, 1075, 1079, 1080
feline, 1075, 1076, 1077-1079
in white-eared cats, 76
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
Solar elastosis, 160, 160
Solenopsis invicta, 506
Solganal. See Aurothioglucose.
Solvent(s), exposure to, 31
Somatomedin(s), 795
Somatotroph(s), 781
Somatotropin. See Growth hormone.
Soriatane. See Acitretin.
Southern blot hybridization, 1239
Spaniel, American water, adult-onset hyposomatotropism
in, 822
pattern baldness in, 965
Brittany, amyloidosis in, 768
collagenous nevus in, 1380-1381
histoplasmosis in, 400
hypothyroidism in, 852
immunodeficiency in, 279t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Cavalier King Charles, black hair follicular dysplasia in,
962

Spaniel (Continued)
eosinophilic granuloma in, 1154
ichthyosis in, 923
persistent scratching in, 996
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Cocker, amyloidosis in, 768
anal sac disorders in, 1201
atopy in, 581
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
cell proliferation kinetics in, 7
cheyletiellosis in, 456
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
distichiasis in, 1188
epidermal nevi in, 1389
epidermis of, turnover time for, 31
fibrosarcomas in, 1287
food hypersensitivity in, 618, 1211, 1213
haircoat of, 8
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
histiocytomas in, 1347
hypothyroidism in, 852, 859
idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
IGF-l plasma levels in. See Xylasine.
immunodeficiency in, 279t
lipomas in, 1308
lymphomas in, 1331
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
melanocytoma in, 1359
mineralized ear canals in, 1211
otitis externa in, 1212, 1213
papillomas in, 1240
plasmacytoma in, 1344
Pseudomonas otitis externa in, 1210-1211
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 81t
sebaceous gland hyperplasia in, 1271
seborrhea in, 227, 243, 913-915, 914, 919-920, 1029,
1032
tail dock neuroma in, 1065, 1296
trichoblastoma in, 1270
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in, 1031, 1036
white piedra in, 374, 374
Irish water, follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
Japanese, scabies in, 466
lip fold intertrigo in, 1107
Springer, acral mutilation in, 995
anal sac disorders in, 1201
basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
deep folliculitis and furunculosis in, 301
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
follicular dysplasia in, 971
food hypersensitivity in, 618
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
histiocytomas in, 1347
idiopathic onychomadesis in, 1198
melanocytoma in, 1359
otitis externa in, 1212
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis of, 180, 929-931,
930-931, 933, 934
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 8It
seborrhea in, 227, 243, 913, 915, 1029, 1032

1520 • Index
Spaniel (Continued)
skin pH in, 3
trichoepithelioma in, 1263
Spectrin, 20
Spherulitets), 221, 222, 1028, 1035
Spherulocytic disease, 1096, 1097
Spherulocytosis, 1096, 1097
Sphinx cat, 957
urticaria pigmentosa in, 997, 997-998,998, 1009,1010
Spiculosis, 954, 956, 956
Spider bitets), 478, 484-485, 486
Spilopsyllus cuniculi, 491, 492
Spinous ear tickis), 442-443, 443
Spirochetosis, venereal, in rabbits, 1445-1446, 1447
SPL. See Staphylococcus aureus, phage lysate.
Spongiosis, 179-180
diffuse, 179-180
eosinophilic, 147
epidermal, 140-142, 143
lymphocytic, 147
Sporanox. See Itraconazole.
Sporothrix schenckii, 337, 386, 388
culture of, 121
Sporotrichosis, 386-390
cause of, 386
claw involvement in, 1195
cutaneolymphatic, 386, 388
cutaneous, 386
diagnosis of, 388, 388, 389
in cats, clinical findings in, 386, 387, 388, 389
clinical management of, 390
in dogs, clinical findings in, 367, 386, 387, 389
clinical management of, 390
pathogenesis of, 386
pododermatitis caused by, 305
zoonotic aspects of, 386-388, 387
Sprayts), 218t, 225
Springer spaniel. See Spaniel, Springer.
Squamatization, definition of, 175
Squameis), from normal skin, 115, 116
Squamous cell, 23
Squamous cell carcinoma, 1021, 1029, 1249-1258
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
clawbed, breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
clinical findings in, 1251-1255
clinical management of, 1256-1258
diagnosis of, 1255-1256, 1255-1257
..
glabrous, nonpigmented skin of trunk (actinic), breedts)
with predilection for, 1237t
in cats, 1241, 1252-1255,1253-1255
in dogs, 1241, 1241, 1251-1252, 1251-1253
in gerbils, 1429-1430
in hamsters, 1442
in mice, 1444
in rabbits, 1451
in rats, 1455
nasal, in dogs, 1251, 1251
of claw bed, 1196, 1198
of lung, cutaneous metastases of, 1374
of pinna, in white-eared cats, 76
papillomas and, 1012, 1013
risk factors for, 1249-1251, 1250t
risk for, haircoat color and, 76
solar-induced, in dogs, 1251
subungual, in dogs, 1252, 1252-1253
Squamous cell carcinoma in situ, 1013
multicentric, 1254, 1258-1259, 1259-1260
in cats, 527-528

Squamous eddyfies), 156
Squamous pearl(s). See Hom pearls (squamous pearls).
Squirrelts), ground, plague in, 325-326
rock, plague in, 325-326
Staffordshire terrier. See Terrier, Staffordshire.
Stain(s), for fungi, 119
special, staining characteristics of various substances
with, 130t
tissue, 129, 130t
Staphage Lysate. See Staphylococcus au reus, phage lysate.
Staphylococcal folliculitis. See Folliculitis. .
..
Staphylococcal hypersensitivity. See Bacteria, hupersensiticity to.
Staphylococcal pyoderma. See Pyoderma.
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, in mice, 1442
Staphylococci, adhesion molecules of, 276
as resident flora, in dogs, 275
autogenous vaccine against, 286
coagulase-negative, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
in dogs, 33-34, 275
as transient flora, in cats, 275
coagulase-positive, antibiotic susceptibility of, 282
as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
in dogs, 33-34
as transient flora, in cats, 275
identification of, 116
in anal sacs, 1201
in hair follicle, 51
infections caused by, depth of, and antibiotic therapy,
283
in dogs, 205
primary, 278
seborrhea and, 915-916, 918, 1030
necrotizing fasciitis caused by, 324- 325
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
resistance in, 276
toxic shock syndrome caused by, in dogs, 324-325
Staphylococcus aureus, and Malassezia pachydemwtis, synergism of, 33
as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
infection by, in hamsters, 1439
in mice, 1442
in rabbits, 1445, 1446
phage lysate (SPL), 286-287
Staphylococcus capitis, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus eptdermidis, as resident flora, in cats, 275
in dogs, 33, 275
Staphylococcus felis, 276
Staphylococcus haerrwlyticus, as resident flora, in cats, 33,
275
Staphylococcus hominis, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus hyicus, 275
Staphylococcus intermedius, 324-325
antibiotic susceptibility of, 282
antibiotic therapy for, 281-282
as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
in dogs, 33-34, 275
autogenous vaccine against, 286
in generalized demodectic mange, 465
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
infections caused by, 275, 277
otitis media caused by, 1214t
strains of, 275
superficial folliculitis caused by, 293
Staphylococcus sciuri, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus simulans, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus wameri, as resident flora, in cats, 33, 275
Staphylococcus xylosus, as resident flora, in dogs, 33, 275

Index • 1521
Steatitis, 171-172
in cats, 1117, 1117-1118
Steinemema carpocapsae, 494
Stemphylium spp., 379
Sterigmatocystin, 1101
Sterile eosinophilic pinnal folliculitis, canine, 1213
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis, canine, 1132-1133, 11341136
Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma, idiopathic, 11361140
Sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile. See Cellulitis, canine juvenile.
Sterile panniculitis, 203
cytologic diagnosis of, 114
in cats, 175, 311
Sterile pustular dermatosis, cytologic diagnosis of,
117
Sterile pyogranuloma, cytologic diagnosis of, 113
on feet, 305
Sterile pyogranuloma-granuloma syndrome, 189
Steroid tachyphylaxis, 248
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, 740
classification of, 732- 733, 733t
Sticker tumor. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Stomatitis, burdock, 1091, 1092
Stomoxys calcitrans, 500, 501
Storage mite- related hypersensitivity, 640
Stratum corneum, emulsion in, in immune defense,
274
in immune defense, 274
Stratum germinativum, 2
Stratum intermedium, 2
Streptococci, a-hemolytic, as resident flora, in cats,
275
in dogs, 275
otitis media caused by, 1214t
,I3-hemolytic, as resident flora, in cats, 33
in dogs, 33
as transient flora, in cats, 275
in oral flora of cats, 276
in subcutaneous abscesses in cats, 310
otitis media caused by, 1214t
in rabbits, 1445
infection by, in mice, 1442
in rats, 1452
necrotizing fasciitis caused by, 324
nongroup-D, otitis media caused by, 1214t
otitis externa caused by, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
pseudomycetoma caused by, 312
toxic shock syndrome caused by, in dogs, 324
Streptococcus canis, 324
Streptococcus faecalis, in anal sacs, 1201
Streptomyces avermitilis, 429, 430
Streptomyces cyanogriseus, 430
Streptomyces hygroscopicus, 429
Streptotrichosis, cutaneous. See Dermatophilosis.
Striae, in hyperadrenocorticism, 802, 803
Stromelysins, 37
Strongyloides stercoralis, in humans, 432
Strongyloides stercoralis-like infection, 434
Stud tail, 55, 215, 1047
Stye (hordoleum), 1186
Subcomeal pustular dermatosis, canine, 1125-1128, 11261128
Subcutaneous chyle, 1090
Subcutaneous emphysema, 1090
Subcutaneous fat sclerosis, 1162-1163, 1164

Subcutis, 63, 63-64, 64
age-related changes in, 65
changes in, 171-172
Subepidermal bubblies. See Subepidermal vacuolar alteration.
Subepidermal vacuolar alteration, 172-173, 173, 697, 699
Sublamina densa area (lamina fihroreticularis), of basement
membrane zone, 34
Submental organ (chin gland), 48
Sucquet-Hoyer canal, 57
Sudan black B stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Sulfa drug(s), adverse effects and side effects of, 724-725
resistance to, 282
Sulfasalazine, for subcomeal pustular dermatosis, 1128
for vasculitis, 753
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 677
Sulfonamidets), adverse effects and side effects of, 283,
721,723
immunosuppressive therapy with, 676-677
potentiated, efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
systemic, for bacterial infections, 281
Sulfonets), immunosuppressive therapy with, 676-677
SulfOxydex, 231, 1027
Sulfur, antiparasitic therapy with, 427
antiseborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027, 1036
as flea repellent, 209
for feline scabies, 484
in powders, 224
in shampoo, 223
topical therapy with, 233- 234
Sulfurlbenzoyl peroxide, shampoo, 356t
antifungal therapy with, 409-410
Sun avoidance, in discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
in pemphigus, 681-682
in pemphigus erythematosus, 693
indications for, 672t, 1077, 1078
Sunburn cells, 140
Sunflower oil, 209, 235
Sunscreents), oral, 254
topical, 236-237
Superantigents), 667
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis, 868
Supracaudal gland. See Tail gland, of dog.
Supracaudal organ. See Tail gland, of cat.
Surface sampling, in diagnosis, 94-107
Surface-acting agent(s), in topical therapy, 231-232
Surgery, 254-263. See also Cryosurgery; Electrosurgery;
Laser surgery; Radiosurgery.
cold steel, 254-255
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
for otitis extema, 1230-1231
for squamous cell carcinoma, 1256-1257
Swab smearis), for Malassezia spp., 368
technique for, 115, 116
Sweat, epitrichial, properties of, 51
Sweat gland(s), 41, 42, 43, 51-54
adenomas of, 1279
age-related changes in, 64-65
atrichial (eccrine), 3, 51, 52, 52-53
carcinoma of, 1198
tumors of, 1275
in cats, 1276
in dogs, 1275
epitrichial (apocrine), 2, 51, 51-52, 52
adenoma of, in hamsters, 1442
carcinoma of, 1276, 1278

1522 • Index
Sweat glandes) (Continued)
changes in, 170-171, 171
cystomatosis of, 1380-1381, 1381
cysts of, 1366, 1379-1381, 1380-1382
dilation of, 171, 171
necrosis of, 171, 171
in feline rhinotmcheitis, 525
nevi of, 1387, 1387, 1388
tumors of, 1275
in cats, 1275, 1276
in dogs, 1272, 1275
in epidermal renewal, 52
tumors of, 1275-1281
breedts) with predilection for, 1237t
cause and pathogenesis of, 1275
clinical findings in, 1275-1276
clinical management of, 1279
diagnosis of, 1276-1277, 1276-1279
in cats, 1275-1276, 1276
in dogs, 1272, 1275
Sweating, atrichial, 53
epitrichial, 53
Swimmer's itch, 436
Sylvatic ringworm. See Dermatophqtosis.
Syndecan, 38
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Synotic, for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
Syphacia mum, 1454
Syphacia obvelata, in mice, 1444
Syphilis, hamster, 1439
rabbit, 1445-1446
Syringadenoma, 1276
papillary, 1277-1278
Systemic hair embolism, in rats, 1454-1455
Systemic lupus erythematosus. See Lupus erythenwtosus,
systemic.
Systemic therapy. See also specific therapy.
broad-spectrum, 238-254

T cells (T lymphocytes), in epidermal immunity, 25-26, 29
Tabanus spp., 502
Tactile hair disk. See Tylotrich pad.
Tactile pad. See Tylotrich pad.
Taenia crassiceps infection, 440, 441
Tail, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t-105t
Tail biting, in dogs, 1064, 1064-1065,1065
Tail dock neuroma, 1065, 1296, 1296-1297, 1297
Tail fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107
Tail gland, of cat, 55
of dog, 54-55
Tail gland hyperplasia, 227
canine, 1039, 1045-1046, 1046, 1047
feline, 1039, 1046-1048,1047, 1048
Tail sucking, in cats, 1070, 1070-1071
Taktic, 470, 473
Talin,20
Tan Sal, 227
Tannints), 680
Tar, in haircoat, 213
Tar products, antiseborrheic therapy with, 918, 1026-1027,
1036
Tazarotene (Tazorac), 234, 241
Tea tree oil, 236, 499
Tegison. See Etretinate.
Teichoic acid, 276
Telangiectasia, idiopathic, 1304-1305

Telogen, 5, 5-6, 48, 49, 50, 341
Telogen defluxion, 6, 198, 888, 893-894
hair examination in, 108, 109
in ferrets, 1425, 1426
in guinea pigs, 1437
in humans, 893-894
Temperature, and hair color, in cats, 8
and hair growth, 5-6
Tenascin, 36t
functions of, 38
in morphogenesis of skin appendages, 3
Tension liners), 9
Teratoma, cutaneous metastases of, 1374
Terbinafine, antifungal therapy with, 358, 415
topical, 356t, 409
Terminal uridinyl transferase nick end labeling (TUNEL)
method, for detection of apoptosis, 140
Terrier, Airedale, alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
cyclic follicular dysplasia in, 890
demodicosis in, 461
follicular dysplasia in, 890, 971
hypothyroidism in, 852
melanocytoma in, 1359
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 823, 890, 893
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 842
vascular nevi in, 1386
American hairless, 957, 958, 958
Bedlington, dermal perifollicular mineralization in, 168
distichiasis in, 1188
haircoat of, 8
melanotrichia in, 1010
Boston, atopy in, 581
calcinosis circumscripta in, 1400
color dilution alopecia in, 967
demodicosis in, 461
fibromas in, 1282
histiocytomas in, 1347
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
mast cell tumors in, 1320
melanocytoma in, 1359
pattern baldness in, 965
pinnal alopecia in, 887
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
Strongyloides stercoralis-like infection in, 434
tail fold intertrigo in, 1107
Bull, acrodermatitis in, 955, 988-989, 992-993, 1119
actinic keratoses in, 1391
immunodeficiency in, 279t
mast cell tumors in, 1320
nasal folliculitis and furunculosis in, 303
pili torti in, 955
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 77t
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
white, risk for skin disorders in, 76
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
zinc deficiency in, 1119
Cairn, atopy in, 581
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8It
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840

Index· 1523
Terrier (Continued)
Dandie Dinmont, hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
fox, fibromas in, 1282
hemangiopericytoma in, 1302
mast cell tumors in, 1320
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
schwannoma in, 1292
wirehaired, drug reactions in, 721
haircoat of, 7
hypogonadism in, 833
Irish, footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
melanocytoma in, 1359
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 8lt
Jack Russell, black hair follicular dysplasia in, 962
dermatophytosis in, 343
familial vasculopathy in, 989
ichthyosis in, 923
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
vasculitis in, 744
Kerry blue, basal cell carcinoma in, 1262
chlorambucil therapy in, side effects of, 673
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 1378
footpad hyperkeratosis in, 935
haircoat of, 8
papillomas in, 1240
pilomatrixoma in, 1267
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
spiculosis in, 956, 956
vascular nevi in, 1386
Lakeland, dermatomyositis in, 940
Maltese, drug reactions in, 721
epiphora in, 1188
traction alopecia in, 888
vaccine reaction in, 744
Manchester, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
follicular dysplasia in, 971
pattern baldness in, 965
pododermatitis in, 305
psychogenic dermatitis in, 305
Scottish, atopy in, .581
demodicosis in, 461
drug reactions in, 721
familial vasculopathy in, 988-989, 989, 990
histiocytomas in, 1347
lymphomas in, 1331
melanocytoma in, 1359
melanoma in, 1361
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 82t
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
vascular nevi in, 1386
vasculitis in, 744
Sealyham, risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome in, 1014
silky, bum injury in, 1082
color dilution alopecia in, 967
drug reactions in, 721, 725
melanotrichia in, 1010
postvaccinal vasculitis in, 749
short hair syndrome in, 897
vaccine reaction in, 744

Terrier (Continued)
Staffordshire, actinic keratoses in, 1391
alopecia in, minoxidil for, 874
follicular dysplasia in, 971
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
histiocytomas in, 1347
mast cell tumors in, 1320
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t, 1238t
risk for skin disorders in, 76
seasonal flank alopecia in, 891
squamous cell carcinoma in, 1251
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
Welsh, idiopathic onychodystrophy in, 1198
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75
West Highland white, atopy in, 581
demodicosis in, 461, 462
epidermal dysplasia in, 914, 928-929, 930-933
food hypersensitivity in, 618
histiocytomas in, 1347
ichthyosis in, 923
ivennectin sensitivity in, 428
Malassezia dermatitis in, 365
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 75, 82t
seborrhea in, 243, 913, 915, 1032
Wheaten, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in, 982
food hypersensitivity in, 618
hyperadrenocorticism in, 801
ichthyosis in, 923
wire-coated, risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in,
75
wirehaired fox, atopy in, 581
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
Yorkshire, atopy in, 581
color dilution alopecia in, 967
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
cyclic follicular dysplasia in, 890
delayed gonadal maturation in, 844
dermatophytosis in, 343, 358
dermoid cyst (sinus) in, 936
distichiasis in, 1188
drug reactions in, 721, 725
glucocorticoid-induced reaction in, 246-247
grooming of, 214
hyperadrenocorticism in, 800
ichthyosis in, 923
keratoacanthoma in, 1348
melanoderma and alopecia in, 964, 974-975, 975
melanotrichia in, 1010
postvaccinal vasculitis in, 749
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
short hair syndrome in, 888, 897
skin pH in, 3
vaccine reaction in, 744
Testicular neoplasia, and skin, 838-843
hyperandrogenism caused by, 834-836, 835-837
in ferrets, 1425
Testosterone, for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 902
Tetracycllne/s), anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory
properties of, 285
efficacy of, against coagulase-positive staphylococci, 282
against Staphylococcus intermedius, 282
for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 529
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t

1524 • Index
Tetracycline and niacinamide, 601
for claw disease, 1200
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma, 1139
for pemphigus, 682
for vasculitis, 753, 754
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t, 677
Tetramethrin, 426
Thallium toxicity, 1097-1101
cause and pathogenesis of, 1097-1098
claw involvement in, 1199
clinical features of, 1089, 1092, 1098, 1099
clinical management of, 1098-1101
diagnosis of, 1098, 1100
Thaumetopoea caterpillar, 506, 507
Thequets), See Nestis).
Therapeutic plan, development of, 93-94
Therapy, surgical. See Surgery.
systemic. See Systemic therapy.
topical. See Topical therapy.
Thermoreceptor(s), 59-61, 62
Thermoregulation, 53-54
arteriovenous anastomoses and, 57
Thiabendazole, otic therapy with, 1227t, 1228
topical, 356t, 409
Thiol(s), 680
Thiopurine methyltransferase, 673
Thiostrepton, topical, for bacterial infection, 280
Thrush. See Candidiasis.
Thymol(s), 230
antipruritic therapy with, 229- 230
Thymoma, 1049, 1049-1050,1050
exfoliative dermatitis and, 905
Thyroid function testts), 784-789
in canine hypothyroidism, 862-863
in lymphocytic thyroiditis, 788-789
provocative, 787-788
Thyroid gland, biopsy of, 788
physiology of, 782- 783
Thyroid hormoncfs), 782-789
and hair growth, 6
and skin, 783- 784
in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
serum levels of, determination of, 784- 786
in canine hypothyroidism, 861-862
therapy with, dermatosis caused by, 1052
Thyroiditis, immune-mediated, 862
Thyrotroph(s), 781
Thyrotropin (TSH), 781
in hypothyroidism, 861
recombinant, 784
serum levels of, determination of, 786
Thyrotropin stimulation test, 787, 862
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 781
recombinant, 784
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test, 788, 862863
Thyroxine, 782-783
in hypothyroidism, 861
serum levels of, determination of, 784-786
measurement of, 784- 786
L-Thyroxine, adverse effects and side effects of, 725
Ticarcillin, otic therapy with, 1227
Tickis), and canine babesiosis, 534
and canine ehrlichiosis, 529-531
and canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 528-529
argasid (soft), 442-443

Tick(s) (Continued)
bites of, 435
black-legged, 444
control of, 445
damage from, 435, 444
deer, 444
in ferrets, 1519
infestation of, 435
ixodid (hard), 442, 443-444, 444
Lone Star, 444
Lyme borreliosis transmission by, 326
Pacific (West Coast), 444
parasitic, 442-445
Rocky Mountain wood, 444
spinous ear, 442-443, 443
structure of, 440, 442
treatment of, 445
Tick bite hypersensitivity, 635
Tick paralysis, 444, 445
Tinea. See also Dermatophytosis.
in humans, 347
Tissue sloughing, miscellaneous causes of, 1086, 1089,
1089-1090
Titanium dioxide, 237
Tofranil. See Imipramine.
Toluidine blue stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Tonofilament(s),23
Toothbrush (MacKenzie) specimen collection method, 120
Topical therapy, 217-237
active ingredients in, 218t, 226-237
factors affecting, 217-220
for canine atopy, 597-601
for hypersensitivity disorders, 563-564
for otitis extema, 1225t-1227t, 1225-1229
formulations for, 217, 218t, 221-226
Torula spp., 377, 378
Torulosis. See Cryptococcosis.
Touch corpuscle. See Tylotrich pad.
Touch dome. See Tylotrich pad.
Toxascaris leonina, in ferrets, 1526
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 88, 101, 740-742
cause and pathogenesis of, 734t, 740
classification of, 732- 733, 733t
clinical features of, 735, 740-741
clinical management of, 742
definition of, 740
diagnosis of, 741
drug-induced, 721
in cats, 723t, 735
in dogs, 722t, 735
histopathology of, 741, 741-742, 742
Toxic shock protein, 275
Toxic shock syndrome, staphylococcal, in dogs, 324-325
streptococcal, in dogs, 324
Toxicosis, arsenic, 1101
miscellaneous, 1101
thallium, 1089, 1092, 1098-1101,1099, 1100
Toxoplasma gondii, 531, 532, 532
Toxoplasmosis, feline, 531, 532
Trachyonychia, 1199
Transepidermal elimination, 175, 176
Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), 32, 209, 220-221,
235,1025
prevention of, 918, 1028
Transglutaminases, 28
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia, 279t

Index' I S2S
Transmissible venereal tumor, 1365-1369
cause and pathogenesis of, 1365
clinical findings in, 1365-1368, 1366, 1367
clinical management of, 1368-1369
diagnosis of, 1368, 1368, 1369
Trauma, to claws, 1193-1194
Trental. See Pentoxifylline.
Treponema pallidum subsp. endernicum, infection by, in
hamsters, 1439
Treponema paraluis-cuniculi, in rabbits, 1445-1446
Tresaderm, 232, 448, 452. See also Thiabendazole.
adverse effects and side effects of, 724-725
Tretinoin, 241
topical, 234
Trexan. See Naltrexone.
Triamcinolone, adrenocortical suppression by, 232
adverse effects and side effects of, 232
for acral lick dermatitis, 1063
for pemphigus foliaceus, 689
immunosuppressive therapy with, 672t
injectable, 247t
intralesional therapy with, 247
otic therapy with, 1226, 1229
Triazolets), antifungal therapy with, 411
Tribrissen. See Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine.
Trichiasis, 1188
Trichobilharzia ocellata, 436
Trichobilharzia physellae, 436
Trichobilharzia stagnicolae, 436
Trichoblastoma, 1013, 1270, 1271
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Trichodectes canis, 487, 490
Trichoecius romboutsi, in mice, 1443
Trichoepithelioma, 1254, 1263, 1263-1264, 1264
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Trichofolliculoma, 1265, 1266
in guinea pig, 1432, 1439
Trichoglyphics, 4
Trichography, 108
Trichohyalin, functions of, 42
Trichohyalin granule(s), 11, 42-43
Tricholemmoma, 1264, 1265
breed(s) with predilection for, 1237t
Trichomalacia, hair examination in, 108, 111
medullary, 895
Trichomycosis axillaris, 327
hair examination in, 108
Trichophyton spp., 336, 339
enzymatic properties of, 341
examination for, 120
in cats, histopathology of, 353
in dogs, clinical findings in, 342-343,344
histopathology of, 349-353, 355
spontaneous remission of, 354
treatment of, 358
superficial mycoses caused by, 338
transmission of, 339-340
Trichophyton ajelloi, in dogs, clinical findings in, 343
Trichophyton equinurn, characteristics of, 339
conidia of, 121
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, cattery and multiple-cat
household dermatophytosis caused by, 358
characteristics of, 339
colonies of, morphology of, 123, 124
conidia of, 121
identification of, 124-125
immunomodulatory properties of, 341

Trichophyton mentagrophytes (Continued)
in cats, clinical findings in, 346
incidence of, 339
spontaneous remission of, 354
in dogs, clinical findings in, 343, 344-345, 346
histopathology of, 355
incidence of, 339
in guinea pigs, 1530
in hamsters, 1439
in mice, 1442
in normal flora, 338
in rabbits, 1446, 1447
in rats, 1453
in veterinary clinic, 340
macroconidia of, 124, 124
microconidia of, 124, 124
microscopic morphology of, 124, 124
transmission of, 340
Trichophyton rubrum, identification of, 124-125
immunomodulatory properties of, 341
in normal flora, 338
Trichophyton schoenleinii, in rabbits, 1446
Wood's lamp examination for, 119,347-349
Trichophyton terrestre, characteristics of, 339
in normal flora, 338
in veterinary clinic, 340
Trichophyton tonsurans, 121
Trichophyton oerrucosum, conidia of, 121
in gninea pigs, 1430
in rabbits, 1446
Trichoptilosis, 895, 950-951, 951, 952
hair examination in, 108, 111
Trichorrhexis nodosa, 950, 951
canine, 895, 895
feline, 905, 905-907, 906
hair examination in, 108, 111
Trichosporon spp., characteristics of, 407
dermatitis caused by, 407-408
superficial mycoses caused by, 339
Trichosporon beigelii, 374, 407
Trichosporon cutaneurn. See Trichosporon beigelii.
Trichosporon pullulans, 407
Triclosan, in shampoo, 223
Triiodothyronine, 782
for feline acquired symmetric alopecia, 901
in hypothyroidism, 861
serum levels of, determination of, 784- 786
measurement of, 784-786
Trilostane, for canine hyperadrenocorticism, 811
Trimenopon hispidum, in guinea pigs, 1433
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, adverse effects and side effects
of, 723, 724-725, 726, 730, 735
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
otic therapy with, 1229
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, adverse effects and side
effects of, 721
in small animals, dosage and administration of, 1418t
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Tris EDTA, otic therapy with, 1227-1228
Trixacarus (Caviacoptes) caviae, on guinea pigs, 1420,
1431-1433, 1432-1434
on rats, 1453
Trixacarus dioersus, on rats, 1447, 1453
Trombicula alfreddugesi. See Eutrombicula alfreddugesi.
Trombicula autumnalis. See Neotrombicula autumnalis.
Trombiculosis (chigger mites), 446-453, 447-449

1526 • Index
Trombiculosis (chigger mites) (Continued)
examination for, 106-107
Tropoelastin, 37
Trunk, common and less common dermatoses of, 104t
Tryptase, 39
in cell type identification, 204t
Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium, in cats and dogs, 315
true, in cats and dogs, 314
unnamed variant, in cats, 314
Tug-of-war blisterts), 1103
Tularemia, 444
Tumorts), 87, 92
contagious venereal. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
cryosurgery for, 258
electrosurgery for, 261
eyelid, 1188-1190, 1189, 1190t
granular cell, 1294-1296, 1295
hyperptgmented, 1013
hyperthermia for, 237-238
melanocytic, breed(s) with predilection for, 1238t
mesenchymal, miscellaneous types of, 1312-1320
neuroendocrine. See Neuroendocrine tumoris), pril7Ulry
cutaneous.
non-neoplastic, 1375-1402
of adipose origin, 1308-1312
of fibroblast origin, 1282-1291
of histiocytic origin, 1013, 1346-1357
of lymphocytic origin, 1013, 1330-1346
of neural origin, 1291-1297
of vascular origin, 1013, 1297-1308
pancreatic, 870
peripheral nerve sheath, 1492
photochemotherapy for, 237
pigmented, 1013, 1013
pituitary, 799
plasmacytic, 1013
primary cutaneous neuroendocrine. See Neuroendocrine
tumor( s), primaru cutaneous.
radiation therapy for, 238
radiosurgery for, 263
reticulum cell, transmissible. See Transmissible venereal
tumor.
sticker. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
surgical treatment of, 254-255
transmissible venereal. See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Tumor seeding, 1475
Tumor suppressor gene(s), 1439
Tunga penetrans, 488-489, 492
Tylosin, efficacy of, against Staphylococcus intermedius,
282
systemic, dosage of, 284t
Tylotrich hairs, 45
Tylotrich padis), 7, 10, 45, 45-46
innervation of, 59
Merkel's cells of, 19, 20, 45, 46
Tympanic membrane, 1204, 1205
alterations in, 1216
in otitis media, 1216-1217
palpation of, 1219-1220
ruptured, cleaners contraindicated with, 1223
Tyrosinase, catalytic activities of, 17
deficiency of, 1018-1019
in melanin pathway, 17
Tyrosinemia, 988-989, 993-995,994

Ulcer(s), 98, 196
decubital, 1097, 1103

Ulcerts) (Continued)
management of, 267-268
eosinophilic. See indolent ulcer, feline.
pressure-point, drug-induced, in dogs, 722t
rodent. See indolent ulcer, feline.
Ulcerative dermatitis, feline, preauricular, idiopathic, 1177
with linear subepidermal fibrosis, 1167, 1167-1168,
1168
of upper lip, idiopathic, in dogs, 1178
Ulcerative pododermatitis, in rabbits, 1445
Ultraviolet light. See also Photosensitivity.
and cutaneous lupus erythematosus, 702
exposure to, miscellaneous effects of, 1080-1081
pathogenic role of, 1080-1081
screens for, in topical therapy, 218t
Uncinaria dermatitis, 431-432, 433
Uncinaria stenocephala, 431, 433
in humans, 432
pododermatitis caused by, 305
Undecylenic acid, 235
Urea, 1028
in creams, 225
topical therapy with, 235
Urinalysis, in hyperadrenocorticism, 805
Urticaria, 91, 571-574
cause and pathogenesis of, 571, 572t
clinical features of, 572, 572, 573
clinical management of, 574
diagnosis of, 572-574
drug-induced, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t
histopathology of, 574
Urticaria pigmentosa, 997, 997-998,998, 1009,1010, 1323
Uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
syndrome), 180, 748-749, 756-759, 758, 1187

Vaccination, adverse effects of, 725, 743-744, 749, 749,
751, 752, 753, 755, 767
against dermatophytosis, 358
Valium. See Diazepam.
van Cieson's stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Vanishing cream, 225
Vasculitis, 180-182, 182, 742- 756. See also Blood vessel(s), cutaneous.
cause and pathogenesis of, 743-744, 751, 754t
cell-poor, 743
characteristics of, 742- 743
classification of, 743
claw involvement in, 1195
clinical features of, 744-750, 744-751
clinical management of, 752- 756
definition of, 742-743
diagnosis of, 751-752, 752-753
drug-induced, 100, 729, 729, 743, 747, 753
in dogs, 725, 729
eosinophilic, 182, 743, 744
food hypersensitivity, 743, 745, 747
granulomatous, 743
histopathologic indicators of, 181, 182t
idiopathic, 743
in dogs, 735
immune complex, in mice, 1444
immune complex (septic), 743
in dogs, 670, 735
in injection site reaction, in cats, 723t
in dogs, 722t

Index' 1527
Vasculitis (Continued)
leukocytocIastic, 181-182, 182, 743
idiopathic, 735
lymphocytic, 181-182, 743, 752
mixed, 743
neutrophilic, 181, 743, 752, 753
nonleukocytocIastic, 743
paraneoplastic, 1375
postvaccinal, 749, 749, 751, 752, 753, 754-756, 755
vaccine-related, 743
Vasculopathy, cutaneous and renal glomerular, 749, 750, 752
familial, 987-989
of German shepherds, 749-751
Vegetation(s),94
Veil cells, 57
Venereal tumorts), transmissible (contagious). See Transmissible venereal tumor.
Ventral comedone syndrome, 1103
Venulets), cutaneous, 56
postcapillary, 56
Verhoeffs stain, staining characteristics of various substances with, 130t
Verotoxin,989
Verrucae. See Papilloma(s); Wart(s).
Versican, 38
Vesiclets), 86, 87, 90
epidermal, 148
intraepidermal, 190, 193t
subepidermal, 190, 193t
Vestibular syndrome, after ear flushing, 1224
Vetalog. See Triamcinolone.
Veterinary dermatology, chronology of, 1459-1464
Villi, dermal, 162, 163
Vimentin, in cell type identification, 204t
Vincristine, for systemic lupus erythematosus, 711
Vinculin, 20, 22t
Viral disease(s), 517-528
and immunodeficiency, 278
in ferrets, 1421, 1421
in guinea pig, 1431
in mice, 1443
in rabbits, 1446
otitis externa caused by, 1212
Vitaminis), supplementation of, 209
Vitamin A (retinol, retinoic acid, Retin-A), 234, 241-242
deficiency of, 1114-1115, 1116
therapy with, 1036
toxicity of, 1116
Vitamin A acid, topical therapy with, 234
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis, 1008, 1036-1037,1037,
1116
Vitamin B, deficiency of, 1118-1119
Vitamin B-complex, deficiency of, 1118-1119
Vitamin C, deficiency of, in guinea pigs, 1434
therapy with, for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 983-984
for perforating dermatitis, 1170
Vitamin D, analogs of, antiseborrheic therapy with, 919, 1030
deficiency of, 1116
production of, in skin, 2
Vitamin E, deficiency of, 1114-1115, 1117, 1117-1118,
1118
therapy with, 1118
for dermatomyositis, 945
for discoid lupus erythematosus, 716
for panniculitis, 1162
for pemphigus, 682
for pemphigus erythematosus, 693
for vasculitis, 753

Vitiligo, 48, 1008-1009, 1015-1016, 1016, 1017
in dogs, diagnosis of, 154
Vizsla, granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in, 1141, 1142,
1146
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
sebaceous adenitis in, 242, 1029
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome. See Uceodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome).
Voight's liners), 9
von Willebrand's disease, 858
Vulvar fold intertrigo, 1106, 1107

Waardenburg-Klein syndrome, 1014
Wagner-Meissner complex. See Meissner's corpuscle.
Walchia americana, 448-450, 450
Walking dandruff. See Cheyletiellosis.
Wartis), in dogs, 525-526, 528, 530-531, 1340. See also
Papilloma(s).
Warty dyskeratoma, 1267, 1268-1269
Wasp(s), 505-506
Water therapy. See Hydrotherapy.
Waterline disease, of black Labrador retrievers, 11751176,1178
Waxtes), 1028
Weber-Christian panniculitis, 1157
Weibel-Palade bodyiies), 56
Weimeraner, blastomycosis in, 392
demodicosis in, 461
histoplasmosis in, 400
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma in,
1136
immunodeficiency in, 279t
immunodeficient dwarfism in, 819, 820
lipomas in, 1308
mast cell tumors in, 1320
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis in, 304
pododermatitis in, 305
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 82t
Sertoli's cell tumor in, 840
Welsh corgi, dermatomyositis in, 940
Ehlers- Danlos syndrome in, 982
haircoat of, 7
immunodeficiency in, 279t
Wen(s). See Cyst(s), infundibular.
West Highland white terrier. See Terrier, West Highland
white.
Wet dressing(s), antipruritic therapy with, 229-230
Whealts), 87, 91
Whippet, color dilution alopecia in, 967
congenital hypotrichosis in, 958
hemangiosarcomas in, 1299
idiopathic onychomadesis in, 1198
pattern baldness in, 965
pinnal alopecia in, 887
risk for neoplastic skin disorders and non-neoplastic
lumps in, 1237t
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 76, 82t
truncal solar dermatitis in, 1079
Whirlpool bath(s), 220
Wilder's reticulin stain, staining characteristics of various
substances with, 130t
Wirehaired griffon, follicular dysplasia in, 971
Witch hazel, 227
Wohlfahrtia spp., 504

1528 • Index
Wohlfahrtia vigil, in ferrets, 1419
Wolfhound, Irish, callus dermatitis in, 1I02
hypothyroidism in, 852
risk for non-neoplastic skin disorders in, 79t
Wood's lamp examination, 1I9, 347-349
Woolly syndrome, 843-845
in male dog, 843
Wound(s), contaminated, management of, 267
healing of, age-related changes in, 65
components of, 264, 264t
factors affecting, 266
stages of, 264- 266
management of, 266-268
Wright's stain, modified (Diff Quik), 1I6
for fungi, 1I9

Xanthine oxidase, 673
Xanthogranuloma(s), preauricular, 1I37, 1137
Xanthomais), 869, 873, 873-874
Xanthomatosis, in diabetic dogs, 868
Xenodine. See Polyhydroxydine.
Xerosis, 1025
X-linked ichthyosis, 31
Xylazine, in diagnosis of GH deficiency, 795
Xylohypha bantiana, 379
Xylohypha emmonsii, 379
Yeastts), 336, 337, 370, 373. See also Funguslfungi; Micro-

flora.
and acne, 1041

Yeast(s) (Continued)
in cytologic diagnosis, 115, 1I7, 1I8t
in surface debris, 155-156
otitis extema caused by, 1213-1215, 1214t
otitis media caused by, 1214t
stain for, 1I9
Yersinia pestis, 325
in abscesses in cats, 31I
Yorkshire terrier. See Terrier, Yorkshire.
Zeis' gland(s), 1I85
Zinc, deficiency of, 1020
and copper balance, 11I9
in chinchilla, 1417
in mice, 1443
in rabbits, 1449
in rats, 1453
supplementation of, 1I20-1I22
Zinc oxide, 237
Zinc-responsive dermatosis, 1114-1115, 1I19-1I22, 1121
claw involvement in, 1I99
Zoonoses. See also Public health considerations.
reverse, 340
Zygomycetes, 384
examination for, specimen collection for, 1I9
Zygomycosis, 377, 384-386, 385
Zygomycota, 377
cycloheximide sensitivity of, 121
Zykin,22t

